

=== PAGE 1 / 44 ===

Data-enabled learning, network eﬀects and competitive advantage ∗
Andrei Hagiu†and Julian Wright‡
June 2020
Abstract
We model competition between ﬁrms which improve their products through learn-
ing from customer data. We explore the implications for competitive dynamics of three
new features of such learning compared to traditional learning-by-doing: (i) learning
increases willingness-to-pay rather than reducing marginal cost, (ii) ﬁrms can improve
their products for each customer based on their individual usage experience, (iii) prod-
ucts can improve while customers are still consuming them. The model allows us to
analyze data-sharing, the shape of the learning curves, and other factors aﬀecting an
incumbent’s competitive advantage. Finally, we show when and how network eﬀects
arise endogenously from data-enabled learning.
Keywords: machine learning, dynamic competition, data sharing, switching costs.
1 Introduction
In recent years, much attention has been focused on the role data can play in providing
incumbent ﬁrms with a competitive advantage. Digitization, connectivity to cloud-based
infrastructures, together with cheaper storage and more eﬀective use of data (i.e. improve-
ments in machine learning algorithms), have made it possible for ﬁrms in many industries
to learn from their customer data and rapidly improve their products. And with better
products, these ﬁrms can attract more customers (or more usage from existing customers),
and therefore obtain more data, potentially creating a self-reinforcing cycle that can make
∗We would like to thank LMU (and Tobias Kretschmer in particular) for hosting us in May and June of
2019, and the valuable feedback colleagues there gave us as we developed a very early version of this paper.
Thanks also to Luis Cabral, Emilio Calvano, Jacques Cremer, Bruno Jullien, and Martin Peitz as well as
other participants at the 17th ZEW Conference on ICT, at APIOC 2019, at IDEI’s 2020 Digital Economics
Conference, and at the Economics of Platforms and MaCCI/EPoS Virtual IO online seminar series for their
comments and suggestions. Gunhaeng Lee and Tat-How Teh provided excellent research assistance.
†Boston University Questrom School of Business, E-mail: ahagiu@bu.edu
‡Department of Economics, National University of Singapore, Singapore, E-mail: jwright@nus.edu.sg
1

=== PAGE 2 / 44 ===

it diﬃcult for any new entrant to compete. We call this self-reinforcing cycle “data-enabled
learning”.1
As an example, consider Google Maps, which relies on learning across users. As its traﬃc
predictions improve, more drivers adopt it, resulting in more data to improve traﬃc predic-
tions, more drivers adopting, and so on. Or consider Google’s Nest smart thermostat, which
relies on personalized learning. As customers use their thermostat more, it learns their pref-
erences better, resulting in improved temperature setting, meaning users tend to keep using
it, and so on. Other notable examples that exhibit data-enabled learning include search
engines (Google, Bing, Baidu), speech recognition applications (e.g. dictation software, vir-
tual assistants, chatbots), smart connected devices (e.g. smart beds by Eight Sleep and
the Tonal home gym), online services that use recommender systems (e.g. Netﬂix, Stitch-
ﬁx, Spotify, Tinder, TrueFit), advanced driver assistance and autonomous vehicle systems
(Cruise, Mobileye, Waymo), as well as a myriad of startups developing AI-based real-time
monitoring and predictions across sectors as diverse as agriculture (Blue River Technology
and Prospera), healthcare (Notable Labs and SkinVision), law (Genie AI and Luminance)
and security (SeeTrue and Vaak).
Data-enabled learning would seem to give incumbent ﬁrms a competitive advantage.
But how strong is this advantage and how does it diﬀer from that obtained from more
traditional mechanisms, such as (i) learning-by-doing, in which an incumbent lowers its costs
as it produces (and sells) more, thereby being able to oﬀer a lower price, and attract more
sales, and (ii) standard network eﬀects, in which an incumbent ﬁrm becomes more valuable
to consumers as it attracts more consumers, thereby attracting even more consumers and
oﬀering even higher value?
To address these questions, and determine the drivers of competitive advantage with data-
enabled learning, we develop a theory of dynamic competition in which ﬁrms can improve
their products via data gleaned from their customers. The theory is based on Bertrand
competition between two inﬁnitely lived ﬁrms, which can diﬀer in the amount of their prior
learning as well as in the shape of their respective learning functions. We allow ﬁrms to set
prices to compete for consumers every period, taking into account how attracting consumers
(and therefore more data) increases the value they can oﬀer to consumers in subsequent
periods. This diﬀers from traditional learning-by-doing because learning works through
willingness-to-pay rather than costs. Aside from diﬀerences in standalone utility and learning
functions, the two ﬁrms in our model are assumed to be identical. An attractive feature of
1Some practitioners have called this phenomenon “data network eﬀects”. Our use of “data-enabled
learning” is intended to be more general since, as discussed below, the phenomenon need not involve any
network eﬀect (for example, if the learning is speciﬁc to each customer). Indeed, one of the contributions of
this paper is to determine when data-enabled learning creates genuine network eﬀects.
2

=== PAGE 3 / 44 ===

our setup is that, despite allowing for general learning functions, we are able to completely
characterize the equilibrium outcomes, determining which ﬁrm will win and each ﬁrm’s value
for any arbitrary starting position of the two ﬁrms.
As a baseline, we consider the case with across-user learning only (Section 3), in which
the two ﬁrms only learn based on the total number of consumers they served in the past.
Since consumers’ willingness-to-pay can increase over time with more users even if prices
remain unchanged, there is a type of dynamic network eﬀect at play. As a result, if a ﬁrm
is able to win in one period, it will enjoy an increasing advantage, and be able to win in all
subsequent periods.
We then consider the case of within-user learning only (Section 4), in which any given
consumer’s willingness-to-pay for a given ﬁrm’s product only depends on how many times
the ﬁrm has served that particular consumer in the past. This highlights a second key
diﬀerence between data-enabled learning and traditional mechanisms, which is the role of
customization: ﬁrms can often improve their products for each individual customer based
on that customer’s particular usage experience. Within-user learning implies the more a
customer uses a ﬁrm’s product, the greater is the eﬀective cost of switching to use the rival’s
product. Such data-enabled learning therefore creates an endogenous switching cost that
grows over time, but not any type of network eﬀect.
In these baseline models, we show that despite the fact that sometimes both the winning
ﬁrm and the losing ﬁrm price below cost to consumers, the competitive outcome always
coincides with the socially optimal outcome. This is not at all an obvious result despite our
Bertrand competition setting: the determination of which ﬁrm wins in a particular period
depends on how much each ﬁrm is willing to subsidize consumers in the current period, which
in turn depends on how much each ﬁrm’s value increases by winning this period as opposed
to losing this period, both of which are only deﬁned recursively. A second fundamental
result comes from comparing across-user learning and within-user learning. We ﬁnd the
conditions for either ﬁrm to win are identical in the two cases. However, all else equal, the
winning ﬁrm makes higher proﬁts when learning is across users rather than within users.
Fundamentally, this is because within-user learning creates endogenous switching costs, so
each individual consumer takes into account that they would beneﬁt if the losing ﬁrm had
a stronger competitive position in the future, which in turn makes the winning ﬁrm have to
price more competitively. We also explain how various factors, such as how far each ﬁrm is
along its learning curve and the nature of the learning curve, aﬀect the condition for either
ﬁrm to win.
In these two baseline models, consumers do not face any coordination problem arising
from network eﬀects. Our third main contribution consists in showing how network eﬀects
3

=== PAGE 4 / 44 ===

that lead to a coordination problem among consumers and thus create a scope for beliefs
to aﬀect the competitive outcome can arise endogenously (Section 5) when we introduce
either one of two realistic features. The ﬁrst is that for cloud-based products and services
that beneﬁt from across-user learning, ﬁrms can often improve their products while their
customers are still consuming them. In these cases, consumers need to form expectations
over how many other consumers will purchase the same product in order to determine the
value they will get from the product.
The second feature that creates a coordination problem from network eﬀects is the com-
bination of across-user and within-user learning. Remarkably, this feature gives rise to a
consumer coordination problem even in the absence of any within-period learning, exoge-
nous switching costs or prices. Speciﬁcally, even if the product is available for free and
consumers are free to change ﬁrms each period, within-user learning creates an endogenous
switching cost. This means consumers also want to choose the product that other consumers
are expected to choose in order to also beneﬁt from across-user learning in subsequent pe-
riods. For example, this means Google likely beneﬁts from real network eﬀects in organic
search, even though it is “costless” for users to switch to Bing.
A key implication of our analysis is that even though data can create a type of dynamic
network eﬀect, there is no systematic ineﬃciency in the market outcome unless the dynamic
network eﬀect leads to a consumer coordination problem and consumer beliefs favor one
of the ﬁrms. On the other hand, even absent any such coordination problem, our analysis
implies that increasing the learning of the losing ﬁrm generally increases consumer surplus.
This might suggest that a policy that forces incumbents to share their superior data with
entrants would be good for consumers. We use our dynamic framework to explore how
data sharing works, and ﬁnd that if ﬁrms anticipate such a policy, they may compete less
aggressively in the ﬁrst place, which in our model means subsidizing consumers less, and
potentially lowering consumer surplus. Finally, we also show that whether data protects
an incumbent from an entrant or not depends on a comparison of the two ﬁrms’ learning
curves. Even if the entrant starts with less data, if it can ultimately create more value from
data, through dynamic pricing it may actually be able to attract consumers and become the
market leader.
2 Related literature
Our paper combines aspects from three large and established literatures. First, it relates
to works that provide theoretical models of competition with learning-by-doing (Fudenberg
and Tirole, 1983, Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1988, Salant, 1990, Cabral and Riordan, 1994,
4

=== PAGE 5 / 44 ===

Besanko et al., 2010). Aside from the fact learning increases consumer’s willingness to pay
rather than decreases ﬁrms’ costs, our particular model of learning is quite distinct from
any in the existing literature. The baseline model with pure across-user learning is closest
to that in the classic paper of Cabral and Riordan (1994). A key diﬀerence is that they
allow for horizontal diﬀerentiation between the two ﬁrms, whereas we allow for vertical
diﬀerentiation (both in standalone values and via asymmetric learning functions). Because
of the tractability of our particular framework, we are able to obtain several new results,
including a general eﬃciency result, the implications of learning for consumer surplus, and
comparative statics on the shape of the learning curves. And we apply the framework to
study questions that do not arise in the learning-by-doing setting: the implications of data
sharing policies, the diﬀerence in competitive outcomes between across-user and within-user
learning, and conditions under which data-enabled learning leads to meaningful network
eﬀects.
Second, our paper relates to the substantial literature on network eﬀects. From this
literature we borrow the modelling of consumer “beliefs” to select equilibria when consumers
play coordination games (Katz and Shapiro, 1986, and Caillaud and Jullien, 2001). At a high
level, our model with across-user and within-period learning is related to dynamic models
with network eﬀects (e.g. Mitchell and Skrzypacz, 2006, Cabral, 2011, Biglaiser and Cremer
2020, Halaburda et al., 2020), since the combination of these two features works in the same
way as exogenous network eﬀects within a period. However, a key diﬀerence is that in our
setting with learning, willingness-to-pay depends not only on the current stock of consumers,
as it would in network eﬀects models, but also on past consumers even if they are no longer
consuming from the ﬁrm.
Third, our paper relates to IO models of switching costs, such as the classic papers of
Klemperer (1987) and Beggs and Klemperer (1992). As noted in the introduction, within-
user learning creates an endogenous switching cost that grows the longer a consumer is with
a particular ﬁrm. To the best of our knowledge, such a feature has not previously been
considered in the switching cost literature even though it seems relevant more generally.
Finally, there are some recent works that also study aspects of data-enabled learning,
albeit using approaches that are very diﬀerent from ours. Prufer and Schottm¨ uller (2017)
model a dynamic feedback loop in which a ﬁrm’s current cost of investing in quality is
decreasing in the ﬁrm’s previous period sales, and greater investment in quality leads to
higher demand in the current period. This diﬀers from our approach in a few ways. They do
not explicitly model consumers’ choices or ﬁrms’ pricing decisions, but focus instead on ﬁrms’
investment decisions. While they allow for learning across users, they do not consider either
within-period learning or within-user learning, and so user coordination issues do not arise.
5

=== PAGE 6 / 44 ===

Finally, they explore the interesting issue of how learning from data allows the dominant ﬁrm
to enter connected markets when the existing data the ﬁrm has collected can be reused, an
issue we do not consider. Farboodi et al. (2019) provide a model of data-enabled learning in
which data helps ﬁrms choose the best production technique and so higher quality products.
They abstract from any strategic ﬁrm behavior or consumer decisions, and instead focus
on the industry dynamics generated from a continuum of price-taking ﬁrms. De Corni` ere
and Taylor (2020) also study the eﬀect of data on competition but focus on showing how
diﬀerent uses of data (including improving a ﬁrm’s product, but also ad targeting and price
discrimination) determine whether data is pro- or anti-competitive. While their framework
is much more general in other ways, they don’t analyze a fully dynamic setting in which
data learning can accumulate. Schaefer et al. (2018) investigate how data drives the quality
of internet search results, providing evidence that the quality of search results improve with
more data on previous searches, and that personalized information is particularly valuable.
Finally, Biglaiser et al. (2019) provides a high-level discussion of the diﬀerent ways ﬁrms
can enjoy incumbency advantages, including access to more data: they note that across-user
learning and within-user learning are two distinct ways in which data generates a competitive
advantage for incumbents.
3 Across-user learning
In this section we focus on across-user learning—each ﬁrm improves the product for each
consumer based on what it learns from the usage of all its consumers. For example, traﬃc
information in Google Maps updates based on information collected from all drivers, and
the traﬃc information shown at any point in time is likely to be the same (or very similar)
for everyone using Google Maps. The learning technology we consider in this section has
the general property that the value to consumers of a given ﬁrm’s product in a period is an
increasing function of the measure of consumers who have purchased the product previously
(past consumers) from the same ﬁrm. We will refer to the model described below as our
baseline setting because it turns out that much of the model setup and analysis, as well
as many of the results in this section carry over (with suitable adjustments) to when we
allow for within-user learning (Section 4 and Section 5.3) and when we allow for learning to
happen within the period(s) that users consume products in (Sections 5.1 and 5.2).
Two ﬁrms, which we refer to as the incumbent I and the entrant E, compete over inﬁnitely
many periods. Both ﬁrms face a marginal cost of production equal tocand compete in prices.
We assume consumers have unit demand in each period and cis high enough that prices are
never negative, thus ensuring consumers would only ever want to purchase one product in
6

=== PAGE 7 / 44 ===

a given period. The (common) one period ahead discount factor is denoted δ, and satisﬁes
0 <δ <1. We normalize the measure of consumers in each period to one, and so the number
of periods that a ﬁrm has previously won also represents the total measure of consumers it
can learn from. In this formulation of across-user learning, there is no distinction between
consumers who are purchasing again (repeat consumers) vs. entirely new consumers. Thus,
our setting in this section is compatible with two interpretations:
•Consumers live for one period only. New consumers in a period make a single buying
decision and then exit.
•The same consumers are active and make purchasing decisions in every period, i.e.
they are inﬁnitely lived, but there is no cost for each of these individual consumers
to switch from one ﬁrm to the other across periods. In this case, the learning from
consumers when they purchase again is assumed to be the same as that from new
consumers.
We assume all consumers are atomistic, which is reasonable given the large number of
consumers ﬁrms are learning from in most of our examples. This means even if consumers
are of the second type above, they do not need to consider the impact of their purchase
decision on the pricing game or the options they will face in subsequent periods. Later,
when we look at within-user learning (or more generally, endogenous switching costs), this
will no longer be true.
The standalone value of ﬁrm i’s product (or service) is denoted si, where i∈{I,E}. This
value is augmented by learning. In any period, ﬁrms are asymmetric Bertrand competitors,
so each ﬁrm will either sell to all (measure one) of the consumers or none. As a result, the
measure of consumers a ﬁrm has learnt from is equivalent to the number of periods in which
it has made positive sales. If ﬁrm ihas sold in Ni periods in the past, then the value current
consumers obtain from ﬁrm i’s product is si+fi
(
min
{
Ni,Ni
})
, where fi is ﬁrm i’s learning
function and Ni is the number of periods ﬁrm imust sell in to reach its maximum threshold
of learning.2
This speciﬁcation captures that ﬁrms learn more as they obtain more consumer data, and
this allows them to increase the value of the product they oﬀer, but at some point they cannot
use consumer data to increase the value of the product oﬀered any further (i.e. learning is
bounded). Later in this section we will show how our results extend to handle unbounded
learning functions. The only requirements on fi are that it is everywhere weakly increasing,
2In what follows, since it will be equivalent, we will refer to the number of periods of positive sales as the
measure of consumers the ﬁrm has sold to.
7

=== PAGE 8 / 44 ===

and without loss of generality, strictly increasing in the last step to reach its maximum
threshold (i.e. fi(Ni) > fi(Ni −1)). In particular, fi need not be a continuous function.
Thus, at any point in time there are potentially three sources of asymmetry between ﬁrms:
(i) diﬀerences in standalone value ( sI ̸= sE), (ii) diﬀerences in the learning curve ( fI ̸= fE
and/or NI ̸= NE), and (iii) diﬀerences in how far along each ﬁrm is on its learning curve in
the current period ( NI ̸= NE).
Consumers and ﬁrms have perfect and complete information. Our focus is on Markovian
strategies and a Markov-perfect equilibrium (MPE). Among MPEs, we also rule out equilibria
which are supported by the losing ﬁrm pricing in such a way that its value would be negative
if it instead won consumers at the prices charged in a particular period and then ﬁrms
followed their equilibrium pricing strategies in all subsequent periods. This is equivalent to
the standard approach of focusing on a Nash equilibrium in which the losing ﬁrm does not
price below its marginal cost in the one-shot asymmetric Bertrand game. Thus, when we
refer to a unique MPE we mean the MPE is unique after eliminating MPEs that involve such
weakly dominated strategies. Finally, we use the convention that E wins in case consumers
are indiﬀerent when both ﬁrms price at the lowest level they would still be willing to sell at.
The relevant state at the start of any period is deﬁned by ( NI,NE), the measures of
past consumers for each ﬁrm. The corresponding value functions for I and E (i.e. the
present discounted values of future proﬁt ﬂows starting with the current period when ﬁrms
follow their equilibrium pricing strategies in every period) are denoted by VI(NI,NE) and
VE(NI,NE). An implicit assumption in our setup is that a ﬁrm will continue to compete
even if in equilibrium its value is zero. This is consistent with our assumption that ﬁrms
do not face any ﬁxed cost to remain in operation and ensures ﬁrms always face some form
of competition. If instead ﬁrms incur ﬁxed costs of operating, the competitive dynamics we
model are best thought of as playing out in one segment of one market, but each of the
two ﬁrms may also serve other market segments, so each ﬁrm covers its ﬁxed costs via these
other market segments. In practice the ﬁrms may also be subject to shocks which allow the
losing ﬁrm to sometimes become the winner (e.g. the discovery of a new technology that
allows them to use their data to reach the learning threshold) and this possibility provides
another reason for a losing ﬁrm to remain in the market. We will analyze a version of our
model with one such shock in Section 3.2, when we consider a data sharing policy.
Consider ﬁrms starting from the state ( NI,NE), so both ﬁrms have reached their re-
spective learning thresholds. Then I oﬀers sI + fI(NI) to consumers in every period and E
oﬀers sE + fE(NE) to consumers in every period. Given the resulting asymmetric Bertrand
competition, and taking into account that the competitive situation will be the same in
every subsequent period, E wins every period starting with the current one if and only if
8

=== PAGE 9 / 44 ===

sE + fE(NE) ≥sI + fI(NI). Furthermore, for each ﬁrm i∈{I,E}, we must have
Vi(NI,NE) = 1
1 −δmax
{
si −sj + fi(Ni) −fj(Nj),0
}
,
where i̸= j.
When a ﬁrm has not yet reached its learning threshold, in order to win in the current
period it will be willing to oﬀer a subsidy equal to the diﬀerence in the discounted value of
its future proﬁts if it were to win the current period and its future proﬁts if it were to lose
the current period. Taking into account the maximum subsidy each ﬁrm is willing to oﬀer in
order to win, we can work out which ﬁrm will win in each period and its corresponding value
function, working backwards from (NI,NE) = (NI,NE). Using this approach, we show that
for any state ( NI,NE), there is a cutoﬀ level of sE −sI above which E wins and below
which I wins. We use two-dimensional backwards induction (in NI and NE) to establish the
following Proposition (unless stated otherwise, all proofs are in the Appendix).
Proposition 1. Suppose I has previously sold to 0 ≤NI ≤NI consumers and E has
previously sold to 0 ≤NE ≤NE consumers. There exists a unique MPE in which E wins in
all periods if and only if sE −sI ≥∆(NI,NE), and I wins in all periods otherwise, where
∆(NI,NE) = (1 −δ)


NI−NI∑
j=0
δjfI(NI + j) −
NE−NE∑
j=0
δjfE(NE + j)

 (1)
+δNI−NI+1fI(NI) −δNE−NE+1fE(NE).
Proposition 1 characterizes I’s competitive advantage, which is captured by ∆( NI,NE).
The higher is ∆( NI,NE), the higher is the level of sE −sI required for E to win. This
function is proportional to the diﬀerence in the present discounted value (PDV) of gross
surplus generated from learning across the two ﬁrms, comparing the paths where each ﬁrm
wins in every period from the current period onwards. It is easily veriﬁed that ∆( NI,NE)
is increasing in NI and decreasing in NE. This captures that along the equilibrium path,
if a ﬁrm wins in the current period, because it beneﬁts from an additional learning period,
∆(NI,NE) shifts such that the same ﬁrm will continue to win in each subsequent period, and
indeed does so even more easily. This last feature is reminiscent of the “increasing increasing
dominance” property explored by Cabral and Riordan (1994). Yet in our setting, E may
win and so move ahead of I even though it is currently behind (e.g. NE < NI). Trivially,
this could be because it learns more despite having less data (so fE (NE) > fI (NI)). More
interestingly, even iffE (NE) <fI (NI), this can be true if its learning curve is steeper and/or
9

=== PAGE 10 / 44 ===

is increasing for longer, and so ultimately generates more value from getting ahead. For
example, inspecting (1), it is easily seen that if fE(NE) >fI(NI), then for all δ suﬃciently
close to 1 (i.e. whenever agents are suﬃciently patient), we have ∆( NI,NE) < 0, so E
has an overall competitive advantage. Thus, with asymmetric learning curves, increasing
dominance does not necessarily hold in our setting.
Proposition 1 was worked out assuming maximum learning thresholds NI and NE exist.
The next Proposition extends these results to the case of any increasing learning curves by
taking the limit of our results as NI →∞ and NE →∞, showing that our framework can
also allow for unbounded learning functions.
Proposition 2. Suppose I has previously sold to 0 ≤NI <NI consumers, E has previously
sold to 0 ≤NE < NE consumers. The equilibrium deﬁned in Proposition 1 remains an
equilibrium in the limit as NI →∞ and NE →∞ (i.e. such that the learning functions
continue to increase forever) provided there exists some power function which the learning
curves lie below in the limit.
The condition in Proposition 2 involves a very weak requirement that allows us to capture
any reasonable learning function. Moreover, by the same logic underlying this result, all our
subsequent characterizations of ∆ (NI,NE), VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) also extend to this
unbounded case, by taking the limit as NI →∞ and NE →∞.
As part of the proof of Proposition 1 we characterize the value function for each ﬁrm,
which we summarize here.
Corollary 1. Suppose I has previously sold to 0 ≤NI ≤NI consumers and E has previously
sold to 0 ≤ NE ≤ NE consumers. In the unique MPE, the ﬁrms’ value functions are
determined as follows:
•if sE −sI < ∆(NI,NE + 1) then VE(NI,NE) = 0 and VI(NI,NE) = sI−sE
1−δ +
∆(NI,NE)−δ∆(NI,NE+1)
(1−δ)2 (no subsidization by E)
•if ∆(NI,NE + 1) ≤sE −sI < ∆(NI,NE), then VE(NI,NE) = 0 and VI(NI,NE) =
sI−sE+∆(NI,NE)
(1−δ)2 (subsidization by E)
•if ∆(NI,NE) ≤sE −sI < ∆(NI + 1,NE), then VE(NI,NE) = sE−sI−∆(NI,NE)
(1−δ)2 and
VI(NI,NE) = 0 (subsidization by I)
•if sE −sI ≥∆(NI + 1,NE), then VE(NI,NE) = sE−sI
1−δ −∆(NI,NE)−δ∆(NI+1,NE)
(1−δ)2 and
VI(NI,NE) = 0 (no subsidization by I),
10

=== PAGE 11 / 44 ===

where we deﬁne ∆(NI + 1,NE) ≡∆(NI,NE) for any 0 ≤NE ≤NE and ∆(NI,NE + 1) ≡
∆(NI,NE) for any 0 ≤NI ≤NI.
Corollary 1 characterizes the PDV of the ﬁrms’ equilibrium proﬁts for diﬀerent states
(NI,NE) and diﬀerent ranges of sE −sI. An interesting implication of the Corollary is that
the losing ﬁrm is still willing to oﬀer a subsidy to consumers for some range of parameters
when the winning ﬁrm’s competitive advantage is not too large. Thus, if ∆( NI,NE + 1) ≤
sE −sI < min
{
∆
(
NI,NE + 1
)
,∆ (NI,NE)
}
, then I wins and E subsidizes for a ﬁnite
number of periods, 3 whereas if ∆( NI,NE + 1) ≤sE −sI < ∆(NI,NE), then I wins and E
subsidizes forever, i.e. even after I reaches its learning threshold. And symmetrically when E
wins and I subsidizes. This reﬂects that in the oﬀ-equilibrium situation that the losing ﬁrm
actually wins the current period, it expects to have a positive value (via some future proﬁts).
This implies the winning ﬁrm’s competitive advantage will be limited by the losing ﬁrm’s
willingness to subsidize consumers in such cases. The willingness of a ﬁrm to oﬀer a subsidy
reﬂects the “prize” that the ﬁrm can obtain from winning, which is not only that it obtains
an improvement in its product (or moves closer to obtaining this improvement) but that the
other ﬁrm does not. This underlying logic is similar to that in standard learning-by-doing
settings (e.g. Cabral and Riordan, 1994) but the price dynamics are diﬀerent: the winning
ﬁrm can charge more with data-enabled learning, whereas the winning ﬁrm would charge
less in a setting equivalent to our model except that learning would decrease marginal costs
instead. Finally, note that Corollary 1 does not rule out the winning ﬁrm also subsidizing
consumers. Speciﬁcally, if ∆( NI,NE) ≤sE −sI < fI (NI) −fE (NE), then E wins and
subsidizes in the current period (and symmetrically for I).
Finally, we analyze how the prospect of future learning impacts the ﬁrms’ proﬁts. Specif-
ically, starting from ( NI,NE), we ask whether ﬁrm proﬁts are higher when NI > NI and
NE >NE, so there is scope for future learning, or when NI = NI and NE = NE, so there is
no scope for future learning. We answer this question for two special cases in the following
proposition.
Proposition 3. If fE = fI = f, NI = NE = N and NE = NI <N, then for any sE ̸= sI,
the PDV of proﬁts of the winning ﬁrm (and of joint proﬁts) is higher than if there were no
scope for future learning. If, instead, there is some asymmetry in the learning functions and
sE −sI ̸= fI (NI) −fE (NE), then there exists ε >0, such that for any (sE,sI) such that
|sE −sI −∆(NI,NE)|<ε, the PDV of joint proﬁts is lower than if there were no scope for
future learning.
3Speciﬁcally, E subsidizes for the ﬁrst kperiods, where k≤NI −NI is uniquely deﬁned by the inequality
∆(NI + k,NE + 1) <sE −sI <∆(NI + k+ 1,NE + 1).
11

=== PAGE 12 / 44 ===

The ﬁrst part of the proposition says that when ﬁrms have identical learning functions
and start on the same point on the learning function, removing the prospect of future learn-
ing decreases the proﬁts of the winner. This is in contrast with the result in Cabral and
Riordan (1994), according to which symmetric ﬁrm are always better oﬀ when the prospect
of future learning-by-doing is removed. The diﬀerence is explained by the presence of vertical
diﬀerentiation independent of learning in our model ( sE ̸= sI), which is absent from Cabral
and Riordan. Thus, when ﬁrms are symmetric in their learning functions in our model, the
availability of future learning necessarily increases the magnitude of vertical diﬀerentiation
that is eventually achieved by the winner (I if sI > sE and E if sE > sI). This eﬀect co-
exists with the eﬀect identiﬁed in Cabral and Riordan, namely that future learning increases
the ﬁrms’ willingness to subsidize, i.e. price more aggressively, which tends to decrease the
winner’s proﬁts. When ﬁrms are symmetric in their learning functions in our setting, the
former eﬀect dominates the latter (unless sI = sE), so we obtain the opposite result from
Cabral and Riordan. However, when ﬁrms are asymmetric, the availability of future learning
no longer necessarily increases vertical diﬀerentiation between the two ﬁrms. In fact, it may
even decrease it, as illustrated by the second part of the proposition.
3.1 Welfare analysis
Since the cutoﬀ (1) in Proposition 1 is directly proportional to the diﬀerence in the PDV
of gross surplus generated from learning if I wins in every period vs. if E wins in every
period, we have the following result.
Proposition 4. The unique MPE outcome characterized in Proposition 1 is socially optimal.
Starting from any point, whichever ﬁrm creates greater PDV of gross surplus from stan-
dalone value and learning assuming it wins every period should be able to oﬀer a higher level
of current utility plus subsidy to consumers, and so given the Bertrand setting should be
able to win in the current period. And if a particular ﬁrm wins in the current period, this
just further increases the value it can oﬀer in future periods, thereby ensuring the same ﬁrm
wins in all future periods. However, the logic behind the eﬃciency result in Proposition 4
is more subtle than this. Indeed, the winning ﬁrm does not always capture the full PDV of
gross surplus that it creates over and above that created by the losing ﬁrm because it has
to compete with a ﬁrm that will sometimes be willing to subsidize in an attempt to win.
Nevertheless, the PDV of the subsidy oﬀered by the losing ﬁrm is just the PDV of its own
future proﬁt assuming it is able to win in the current period. Thus, despite the possibility
of subsidies, it turns out that the only way a ﬁrm wins (and has a positive value) is if the
12

=== PAGE 13 / 44 ===

PDV of gross surplus that it creates by winning every period is greater than that created by
the rival ﬁrm. This is equivalent to the condition for eﬃciency to be maximized.
Further emphasizing that the result does not just follow automatically from Bertrand
competition, the cutoﬀ for E to win in a ﬁnite period version of the model is not generally
socially optimal. Indeed, in an Online Appendix we show that the equilibrium cutoﬀ when
the ﬁrms start with ( NI,NE) previous sales and the game ends after T ≥1 periods is
∆(NI,NE,T) = (1 −δ)
(T−1∑
j=0
δj(1 −δT−j)
1 −(T + 1)δT + TδT+1 (fI(NI + j) −fE(NE + j))
)
,
while the socially eﬃcient cutoﬀ in the T-period model is
∆S(NI,NE,T) = (1 −δ)
(T−1∑
j=0
δj
1 −δT (fI(NI + j) −fE(NE + j))
)
.
When T > 1, we generally have ∆( NI,NE,T) ̸= ∆ S(NI,NE,T), however it is easily
veriﬁed that when fi(Ni) = fi
(
min
{
Ni,Ni
})
for i = I,E and T tends to inﬁnity, both
∆(NI,NE,T) and ∆S(NI,NE,T) converge to ∆(NI,NE) deﬁned in (1).
In the ﬁnite case withT >1, the distortion ∆(NI,NE,T)−∆S(NI,NE,T) can go in either
direction depending on the shapes of the learning curves. For example, it is straightforward
to verify that with fI = fE ≡f and NI > NE, this distortion is positive if f is concave,
negative if f is convex, and zero iff is linear. On the other hand, if fi(x) = θixand NI ≥NE,
the distortion is positive if θI <θE, negative if θI >θE, and zero if θI = θE.
Clearly prices play a key role in the eﬃciency result of Proposition 4. If prices were
constrained to be zero in every period, there would be no subsidies, meaning consumers
would compare sI + fI(NI) and sE + fE(NE) in the current period, and choose E in every
period if and only if sE−sI ≥fI(NI)−fE(NE). Future learning beneﬁts would not be taken
into account and the equilibrium choice of ﬁrm would diverge from the socially optimal one.
This emphasizes that competitive subsidies play a key role in ensuring atomistic consumers
who make their purchase decisions in every period solely on the basis of current period utility
(because even in the case that they are long-lived, they face no cost of switching ﬁrms in any
future period and can ignore the implications of their individual choice on the future options
they will face), end up taking into account the future beneﬁts of their choices in deciding
which ﬁrm to buy from.
With respect to consumer surplus, note that in equilibrium, the ﬁrms’ prices in any given
period leave consumers indiﬀerent between the two ﬁrms. Since along the equilibrium path,
once a ﬁrm wins, it will win in all future periods, this implies that the PDV of consumer
13

=== PAGE 14 / 44 ===

surplus is determined by the surplus oﬀered by the losing ﬁrm in each period along the
equilibrium path. As a result, learning by the winning ﬁrm as it sells to additional consumers
each period makes consumers weakly worse oﬀ. To see this note ﬁrst that if the losing ﬁrm
has already stopped oﬀering a subsidy (e.g. the no-subsidization case in Corollary 1), then
learning by the winner does not change the PDV of consumer surplus oﬀered by the loser,
which in case ﬁrm i is the losing ﬁrm is ﬁxed at
CS(NI,NE) = si −c+ fi(Ni)
1 −δ .
In case the losing ﬁrm currently oﬀers a subsidy (either one of the two subsidization cases in
Corollary 1), the PDV of consumer surplus can be determined by the PDV of total surplus
less the PDV of the winning ﬁrm’s proﬁt stream, i.e.
CS(NI,NE) = si −c
1 −δ +
Ni−Ni∑
k=0
δkfi(Ni + k) + δNi−Ni+1
1 −δ fi(Ni) −
(si −sj + ∆(NI,NE)
(1 −δ)2
)
in case ﬁrm iis the winning ﬁrm and ﬁrm j is the losing ﬁrm. It is straightforward to check
that in this case CS(NI,NE) is decreasing in Ni, so consumer surplus is strictly decreasing
as the winning ﬁrm learns more along the equilibrium path. This reﬂects that the losing
ﬁrm’s subsidy gets smaller over time as the winning ﬁrm’s learning advantage continues to
increase along the equilibrium path.
The fact that additional learning by the winning ﬁrm as it sells to more consumers does
not help consumers reﬂects the fact that in this model, the winning ﬁrm extracts all the
additional learning beneﬁt above the surplus that the losing ﬁrm can oﬀer. While with a
more general model of competition or with elastic aggregate demand we may expect some of
the winning ﬁrm’s learning beneﬁt to be shared with consumers, the result that consumers
can be made worse oﬀ by the winning ﬁrm’s learning because the losing ﬁrm is no longer
willing to subsidize as much in an attempt to compete is likely to be much more general. It
suggests consumers would be better oﬀ if they could somehow deviate by coordinating on
joining the losing ﬁrm instead of the winning ﬁrm for a number of periods. However, given
each individual consumer is atomless and can freely switch in each period, she has no reason
to internalize this eﬀect since her own decision about which ﬁrm to join will not aﬀect the
consumer surplus she can obtain next period (in the case she is long lived). This suggests a
possible role for a data sharing policy, which we consider in the next section.
14

=== PAGE 15 / 44 ===

3.2 Data sharing
Requiring the incumbent to share its data with the entrant would be one way to help E
catch up to the learning of I, and based on the analysis in the previous section, would seem
to be good for consumers. However, there is potentially a countervailing eﬀect highlighted
by our model. If E anticipates being able to catch up to I’s learning through such a policy,
it may compete less aggressively in the ﬁrst place (a form of free-riding), which in our model
can mean subsidizing consumers less.
To formalize this tradeoﬀ in the simplest possible way and determine the eﬀect of data
sharing on consumer surplus, we assume both ﬁrms face the same learning function f and
learning threshold N, and that I has achieved maximal learning while E has not. For the
anticipatory eﬀect of data sharing on E’s pricing to be captured, there should be at least
one period in which ﬁrms compete before I’s data is shared with E. To reﬂect this and the
likely uncertainty over the time until E actually obtains I’s data under a data sharing policy,
we assume that each period, with probability 0 < λ≤1, I shares its superior data with E
whenever E remains behind at the end of that period.
In the following proposition, we compare the implied PDV of consumer surplus with data
sharing to that arising without data sharing. To proceed, we deﬁne for every 0 ≤NE <N
the cutoﬀs4
∆(N,NE,λ) = (1 −δ(1 −λ))
N−NE−1∑
j=0
(δ(1 −λ))j (
f(N) −f(NE + j)
)
. (2)
and
Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
=
∆(N,NE,0)
(1−δ)2 −∆(N,NE,λ)
(1−δ(1−λ))2
1
(1−δ)2 − 1
(1−δ(1−λ))2
. (3)
It can be veriﬁed that
0 ≤∆(N,NE + 1,λ) ≤Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
<∆(N,NE,λ).
In the appendix, we show that when I is at the learning threshold and E can get the
full beneﬁt of data sharing with probability λ, E wins the current period if and only if
sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ). Otherwise, I wins the current period. However, unlike the baseline
model, the same ﬁrm need not win all periods. Indeed, if 0 ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ), then I
wins every period as long as E does not get access to I’s data, but once E shares that data,
the outcome switches to E winning forever. We then obtain the following result.
4We use the convention that ∆(N,N,λ) = 0.
15

=== PAGE 16 / 44 ===

Proposition 5. Suppose the learning functions are identical, i.e. fI = fE = f, and assume
NI = N >NE. Then:
•if sE −sI ≤ Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
, data sharing with probability λ increases the PDV of
consumer surplus
•if Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
< sE −sI ≤∆(N,NE,λ), data sharing with probability λ decreases
the PDV of consumer surplus
•if sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ), data sharing with probability λ does not change the PDV of
consumer surplus.
Proposition 5 compares the PDV of consumer surplus when λ >0 (i.e. under a data
sharing policy) with λ = 0 (so there is no chance of I being forced to share its data with
E). It conﬁrms that data sharing is not always good for consumers, and indeed shows that
it can be bad. For data sharing to be bad for consumers, E must have a suﬃciently strong
product advantage (i.e. sE −sI >Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
). This ensures the subsidy it oﬀers absent
data sharing is large, which means the extent to which data sharing can reduce E’s subsidy
is also large. But the advantage cannot be so strong that E would win prior to any data
being shared (i.e. we require sE −sI ≤∆(N,NE,λ)). In this range, the anticipation of
possible data sharing leads E to reduce the extent of its subsidy to consumers. For example,
in the extreme case in which data sharing happens for sure at the end of the ﬁrst period
(λ= 1), E completely removes its subsidy to consumers under a data sharing policy. Given
we are considering the range of sE −sI for which E loses prior to any data being shared,
the higher pricing of E reduces the competitive pressure on I, and so increases the price
consumers pay for I’s oﬀering. On the other hand, consumers will be better oﬀ after I’s data
is shared, reﬂecting that I will share more of the surplus it creates with consumers—this is
either because I still wins but E now provides a stronger competitive constraint on I’s pricing,
or because I now loses and so is willing to oﬀer all of the surplus it creates in an attempt
to attract consumers. In the range of Θ a(
N,NE,λ
)
< sE −sI < ∆(N,NE,λ), the former
negative ex-ante eﬀect of data sharing on consumers outweighs the latter ex-post positive
eﬀect, reﬂecting that data sharing leads to a large reduction in E’s subsidy in this range. In
the range ∆(N,NE+1,λ) ≤sE−sI <Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
this result reverses because data sharing
only leads to a relatively small reduction in E’s subsidy. In case sE−sI <∆(N,NE+1,λ), E
never subsidizes consumers, so we only get the positive ex-post eﬀect of data sharing. Finally,
when sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ), E wins prior to any data being shared, and it continues to win
after I’s data is shared, so consumers obtain the surplus created by I which is unchanged by
data sharing.
16

=== PAGE 17 / 44 ===

While consumers may be better or worse oﬀ under data sharing, it is straightforward to
conﬁrm that the PDV of expected welfare is strictly higher with this type of data sharing
whenever it implies a positive probability of E winning (since E’s surplus is shifted up in the
case any data is shared), and is otherwise unchanged.
3.3 Determinants of competitive advantage
Recall I’s competitive advantage is measured by ∆( NI,NE) since a higher value of
∆(NI,NE) means E requires a higher standalone beneﬁt to win. Some general compara-
tive static results are summarized in the following Proposition.
Proposition 6. Consider the general learning functions fI and fE. Suppose 0 ≤NI ≤NI
and 0 ≤ NE ≤ NE. Then I’s competitive advantage is (i) increasing in the number of
previous consumers NI that I has sold to and decreasing in the number of previous consumers
NE that E has sold to; (ii) increasing in the maximum threshold for I’s learning NI and
decreasing in the maximum threshold for E’s learning NE; (iii) increasing in anything that
increases I’s learning function fI and decreasing in anything that increases E’s learning
function fE; and (iv) independent of an equal (additive) increase in both ﬁrms learning
functions.
The result in (i) was already noted earlier and is entirely intuitive—being higher up its
learning curve gives I more of an advantage. The results in (ii) and (iii) follow directly from
an inspection of (1). Simply put, the higher a ﬁrm’s learning threshold or the value the
ﬁrm gains from learning, the bigger that ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. Adding the same
constant to both fI and fE does not change ∆(NI,NE), so any additive change to the value
of learning that aﬀects both ﬁrms equally cancels out, which explains the result in (iv).
To explore the implications of changes that aﬀect both ﬁrms at the same time, we now
resort to a speciﬁc functional form by assuming both ﬁrms face S-shaped learning functions.
In general, with an S-shaped learning curve, the value initially increases little with additional
data since it takes some initial minimum corpus of data to get things started, then increases
rapidly once the minimum training data has been gathered, and ﬁnally no longer increases
much after most learning has been exhausted. We approximate such a learning curve by
assuming there is no learning until a minimum amount of past sales is obtained, after which
there is linear learning until the maximum threshold level of learning is achieved. Formally,
we assume when ﬁrm i has sold to Ni past consumers, the value it oﬀers from learning is
fi
(
min
{
Ni,Ni
})
= θimax
{
min
{
Ni,Ni
}
−Ni,0
}
, where Ni and Ni are the minimum and
maximum thresholds for ﬁrm i and 0 ≤Ni ≤Ni. Note that this formulation of S-shaped
17

=== PAGE 18 / 44 ===

learning functions includes as special cases that one or both of the learning functions are
linear (Ni = 0) and one or both are step functions ( Ni −Ni = 1 and Ni >0).
Applying these functions to (1) reveals that the cutoﬀ for E to win in this case is
∆(NI,NE) = θI
(
max {NI −NI,0}+ δmax{NI−NI,0}+1 −δNI−NI+1
1 −δ
)
(4)
−θE
(
max {NE −NE,0}+ δmax{NE−NE,0}+1 −δNE−NE+1
1 −δ
)
,
for all 0 ≤NI ≤NI and 0 ≤NE ≤NE. Note (4) implies that when neither ﬁrm has
reached the increasing part of its learning curve yet, what really matters is how far each
ﬁrm is from being able to move up its learning curve Ni, rather than which ﬁrm has sold to
more customers in the past. Thus, even though I may begin with more data ( NI > NE), if
E’s learning begins sooner ( NE −NE < NI −NI), it may enjoy a competitive advantage.
Likewise, if additional data translates into a better product for E at a faster rate than for I
(θE >θI).
Using this cutoﬀ we are able to show the following comparative statics.
Proposition 7. Suppose both ﬁrms have S-shaped learning functions. (i) I’s competitive
advantage is increasing in an equal additive increase in θI and θE if I is (weakly) closer to
reaching its maximum threshold and the increasing part of I’s learning curve lasts (weakly)
longer (i.e. NI −NI ≤NE −NE and NI −NI ≥NE −NE, with one inequality strict).
(ii) If the learning functions are identical (i.e. θI = θE, NI = NE = N, NI = NE = N)
and NI > NE, then I’s competitive advantage is increasing in how close both ﬁrms are to
obtaining some positive value from learning when neither ﬁrm has learnt anything yet (i.e.
is larger when both NI and NE increase by k, provided NI + k ≤N and NE + k ≤N)
and decreasing in how close both ﬁrms are to obtaining maximum learning when both have
already obtained some positive value from learning (i.e. is smaller when both ﬁrms are k
periods closer to the maximum learning threshold provided NI >N and NE >N ).
The ﬁrst result covers several diﬀerent cases including the case when the ﬁrms have the
same thresholds but I is just further along its learning curve, and the case when both ﬁrms
are the same number of periods away from reaching their respective minimum thresholds
but the increasing part of I’s learning curve lasts longer. The logic for the result is that if
I has had more periods of learning and/or will have more periods of future learning, then
an equal increase in the value obtained from each learning period for the two ﬁrms provides
an advantage for I. The result in (ii) is less obvious. The ﬁrst part can be interpreted as
18

=== PAGE 19 / 44 ===

considering what happens when both ﬁrms experience some improvement in their learning
(e.g. access to some new data or some new technology that allows them to speed up their
initial learning) so that both ﬁrms ﬁnd themselves further along the initial ﬂat part of their
learning curve (i.e. closer to where they can oﬀer positive value from learning). Alternatively,
it can be interpreted as considering what happens when the learning technology improves
so ﬁrms require fewer periods of initial consumer data until the value from learning starts
to increase. Either way, it means that this common improvement in learning increases I’s
competitive advantage. To understand this result note that if ﬁrms are yet to move onto the
increasing part of the learning curve, requiring fewer periods of customer data to reach the
increasing part brings forward (i.e. discounts less) the advantage that I obtains from being
closer to the threshold, thereby increasing its competitive advantage. This result reverses
when ﬁrms are already on the increasing part of the learning curve. Here, a reduction in the
number of learning periods both ﬁrms need to reach the maximum threshold decreases the
number of periods over which I can enjoy its learning advantage, so helps E.
4 Within-user learning
In this section we focus on within-user learning. To be comparable to the case of across-
user learning, we assume the same measure one of consumers are present in every period.
Thus, consumers are inﬁnitely lived but can switch ﬁrms in any period.
Like the previous section, the value to a given consumer of ﬁrm i’s product in the current
period is si + fi
(
min
{
Ni,Ni
})
for i ∈{I,E}. The diﬀerence is that here Ni refers to the
number of times the consumer has purchased from the same ﬁrm before, rather than the
total number of consumers that the ﬁrm has sold to. Another key diﬀerence that naturally
arises in the case of within-period learning is the possibility for ﬁrms to price discriminate
based on an individual consumer’s history. Unlike the case with across-user learning, here
the individual consumer’s history aﬀects the value oﬀered by each ﬁrm’s product. Consistent
with our perfect information setup, we assume that both ﬁrms can observe how many periods
a customer has consumed from each ﬁrm previously, and can price discriminate accordingly.5
The fact that there is no across-user learning and that ﬁrms can price discriminate with
respect to individual consumers ensures that the analysis can be done independently for
each individual consumer.
5Obviously, each ﬁrm will know how many times a consumer has purchased from it before, so can condition
its prices on this information. Given the model setup in which the same consumers are present in every period,
each ﬁrm would therefore also be able to work out how many times a consumer has purchased from the rival
ﬁrm in the past. In practice, ﬁrms may elicit this information from consumers by requiring a consumer
supply their past purchase records so as to provide them with a better deal if they switch.
19

=== PAGE 20 / 44 ===

We can then characterize when E wins, when I wins, the social eﬃciency of the outcome,
and the value obtained by ﬁrms.
Proposition 8. Suppose I has sold NI times in the past to a given consumer and E has
sold NE times to that consumer, where 0 ≤NI ≤NI and 0 ≤NE ≤NE. Then a unique
MPE exists in which E wins in all periods if and only if sE −sI ≥∆(NI,NE), and I wins in
all periods otherwise, where ∆(NI,NE) is deﬁned by (1). The outcome is socially optimal.
Moreover, the ﬁrms’ value functions are determined as follows:
•if sE −sI <∆(NI,NE), then VE(NI,NE) = 0 and VI(NI,NE) = sI−sE+∆(NI,NE)
1−δ (with
subsidization by E if and only if ∆(NI,NE + 1) ≤sE −sI <∆(NI,NE))
•if sE −sI ≥∆(NI,NE), then VE(NI,NE) = sE−sI−∆(NI,NE)
1−δ and VI(NI,NE) = 0 (with
subsidization by I if and only if ∆(NI,NE) ≤sE −sI <∆(NI + 1,NE)).
Proposition 8 shows that the cutoﬀ in sE −sI that determines which ﬁrm wins in each
period coincides with that obtained in the across-user case, and therefore remains socially
optimal. As in the case with across-user learning, all the results in the Proposition remain
valid when NI →∞ and NE →∞, provided learning functions are bounded by some power
function. This means the comparative static results in Section 3.3 carry over to the case of
within-user learning. However, despite this equivalence, the logic behind the result and its
proof are quite diﬀerent. With across-user learning, we never had to solve the consumers’
forward-looking problem given their choice in any given period didn’t aﬀect their options in
subsequent periods. In contrast, here consumers have to take into account the eﬀect of their
current choice of ﬁrm on their future options (within-user learning acts as an endogenous
switching cost), and so we need to determine the value functions for consumers as well as
for ﬁrms. In the proof of Proposition 8, we construct the consumers’ value functions, and
show that consumers never expect to switch ﬁrms in equilibrium.
In contrast to the case of across-user learning, the logic for why the equilibrium outcome
under within-user learning coincides with the socially optimal outcome is quite straightfor-
ward. Here consumers are forward looking, so they take into account all future subsidies
and utility they will receive from their chosen ﬁrm. Starting from any point, whichever ﬁrm
creates greater PDV of gross surplus from learning assuming it wins every period will be
able to oﬀer a higher level of utility plus subsidy to consumers, and so given the Bertrand
setting will win in the current period. And if a particular ﬁrm wins in the current period,
this just further increases the value it can oﬀer in future periods, thereby ensuring the same
ﬁrm wins in all future periods. Consistent with this, in the Online Appendix we conﬁrm
20

=== PAGE 21 / 44 ===

that the outcome with within-user learning and a ﬁnite time horizon is also always socially
optimal, in contrast to what we found for across-user learning.
To further highlight the fact that although the cutoﬀ is the same, the rationale for the
result is diﬀerent, note that prices no longer drive the equilibrium result. Indeed, if prices
were set to zero in all periods (which obviously rules out any subsidies), consumers would
simply compare their respective present discounted willingness-to-pay between the two ﬁrms,
so the condition for E to win would remain the same.
Another particularly interesting diﬀerence relative to the results with across-user learning
is that the winning ﬁrm always does better with across-user learning than with the equivalent
setting under within-user learning.
Proposition 9. Comparing the case of within-user learning with across-user learning for
the same learning curves, the same learning thresholds, and the same current state (NI,NE),
then provided either NI <NI or NE <NE, the PDV of the winning ﬁrm’s proﬁt is strictly
higher under across-user learning than in the case of within-user learning.
The main reason behind the result in Proposition 9 is that the winning ﬁrm needs to price
more aggressively under within-user learning because consumers need to take into account
future utility when making their choice of ﬁrm. The logic is that within-user learning acts as
an endogenous switching cost: consumers take into account that the surplus they will be left
with in any period is the surplus oﬀered by the losing ﬁrm (due to Bertrand competition),
and that this surplus will be lower if they buy from the winning ﬁrm this period versus if they
buy from the losing ﬁrm this period. Thus, the winning ﬁrm must compensate consumers by
pricing lower in the current period compared to the case with across-user learning, in which
consumers did not need to take into account future utility when making their choice of ﬁrm.
Indeed, with across-user learning, each individual consumer’s choice in the current period
had no impact on the relative competitiveness of the two ﬁrms next period (since consumers
are atomistic). Obviously, Proposition 9 implies that consumers are better oﬀ under within-
user learning than under the comparable situation with across-user learning. This result can
also be interpreted as meaning that under within-user learning, forward-looking consumers
are better oﬀ than myopic consumers. Indeed, the setting with within-user learning but
myopic consumers would result in exactly the same outcome as the case with across-user
learning, where consumers had no reason to consider more than their current surplus when
deciding which ﬁrm to buy from.
Finally, we can compare the eﬀect of anticipated data sharing under within-user learning
with that under across-user learning. To do so, we use exactly the same set-up for data
21

=== PAGE 22 / 44 ===

sharing as in Section 3.2. Following very similar steps to Proposition 5, we show in the
Appendix that data sharing decreases consumer surplus if and only if
Θw(
N,NE,λ
)
<sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ), (5)
where ∆(N,NE,λ) is still given by (2) and
Θw(
N,NE,λ
)
=
∆(N,NE,0)
1−δ −∆(N,NE,λ)
1−δ(1−λ)
1
1−δ − 1
1−δ(1−λ)
. (6)
If sE −sI is less than the lower bound in (5), then data sharing increases consumer surplus,
while if sE −sI is greater than the upper bound in (5), then data sharing has no impact on
consumer surplus. It is easily conﬁrmed that Θ w(
N,NE,λ
)
is lower than the corresponding
cutoﬀ Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
for the case with across-user learning given by (3), which means that
the region under which data sharing decreases consumer surplus is larger under within-
user learning. This is consistent with the result above that within-user learning makes the
two ﬁrms compete more aggressively in the absence of data sharing, which diminishes the
potential beneﬁts of data sharing.
5 Endogenous network eﬀects and consumer beliefs
So far network eﬀects have not played any role in the equilibrium analysis. In particular,
consumers have not had to form beliefs about which ﬁrm other consumers will coordinate
on in any given period. In Section 4 this was because learning was speciﬁc to each consumer
and ﬁrms could price discriminate with respect to individual consumers. With across-user
learning in Section 3, although there was a self-reinforcing dynamic across periods in which
a ﬁrm that attracts consumers this period improves its product and ﬁnds it easier to attract
consumers in subsequent periods, current consumers still did not face the usual coordination
problem that arises under classic network eﬀects. Indeed, even with long-lived consumers,
because each consumer was atomistic and could costlessly switch each period, a consumer’s
decision in one period had no eﬀect on the opportunities they could enjoy in subsequent
periods, so there was no reason to take into account the decisions of contemporary consumers.
The purpose of this section is to show when network eﬀects which create a coordination
problem for consumers can arise endogenously in our framework. We will consider three
ways in which this can happen. In the ﬁrst two subsections, we assume that the product
continues to improve during the period (Section 5.1) or periods (5.2) over which consumers
derive utility from the product. This means each consumer needs to anticipate how many
22

=== PAGE 23 / 44 ===

other contemporary or future consumers will choose the same product. Meanwhile (and most
interestingly), in Section 5.3 we show network eﬀects arise endogenously once we combine
across-user and within-user learning, even in the absence of any exogenous switching cost or
price (the products are assumed to be available for free).
5.1 Across-user learning and within-period learning
Consider our benchmark model of Section 3 in which there is across-user learning, but
now allow ﬁrms to learn immediately from consumers purchasing in the current period, i.e.
we allow for “within-period” learning. As argued in the introduction, within-period learning
is a key distinguishing feature of cloud-based learning from consumers, and contrasts with
earlier types of learning from consumers, where the new product features were only embedded
in the next releases of the product which would be sold to future consumers. Within-period
learning is assumed to work in exactly the same way as learning from past sales to consumers:
it is just like another period of learning, except it provides value to current consumers.
Speciﬁcally, if ﬁrm i has previously sold to a total measure of Ni consumers and sells to
ni ≤ 1 consumers in the current period, then the value current consumers obtain from
ﬁrm i’s product is si + fi
(
min
{
Ni + ni,Ni
})
, where Ni is the number of periods of sales
(including the current period) it takes for ﬁrm ito reach the maximum threshold of learning.
A consequence of combining within-period learning and across-user learning is that there
can be multiple equilibria in consumers’ decision of which ﬁrm to buy from, given prices in
any period, just like with regular network eﬀects. Speciﬁcally, consumers may prefer buying
from I if they expect all other consumers to buy from I in the current period, and they may
prefer to buy from E if they expect all other consumers to buy from E in the current period.
We will compare the outcomes under two types of beliefs. First, we assume that consumers
believe all other consumers will coordinate on the equilibrium outcome that is best for them
in the given period. This selects the equilibrium which maximizes the consumers’ surplus
(i.e. net utility) in that period. In the case consumers live for one period only, which recall
is one interpretation of our across-user learning setup, this will indeed correspond to the
Pareto optimal equilibrium for consumers, and with this in mind, we refer to these beliefs
as “Pareto” beliefs. We will then contrast Pareto beliefs with beliefs that always favor the
incumbent. The latter means that in each period consumers believe all other consumers will
buy from I whenever for given prices, buying from I is an equilibrium outcome.
Relative to Proposition 1, the case of within-period learning and Pareto beliefs is as if
both ﬁrms were one period closer to their respective maximum learning thresholds, whereas
the case of within-period learning and beliefs favoring I is as if only I were one period closer
23

=== PAGE 24 / 44 ===

to its maximum learning threshold. Then following an almost identical proof to that of
Proposition 1 we obtain the following result.
Proposition 10. Suppose I has previously sold to 0 ≤NI ≤NI consumers and E has
previously sold to 0 ≤NE ≤NE consumers. With Pareto beliefs, E wins in all periods
if and only if sE −sI ≥∆(NI + 1,NE + 1), and I wins in all periods otherwise, where
∆(NI,NE) is deﬁned by (1). With favorable beliefs for I, E wins in all periods if and only if
sE −sI ≥∆(NI + 1,NE), and I wins in all periods otherwise. The equilibrium outcome is
socially eﬃcient with Pareto beliefs and involves I winning too often with beliefs favoring I.
The intuition for these results is the same as before. Note the socially optimal outcome
takes into account the higher willingness-to-pay created from learning within the period, just
as the equilibrium conditions do. Moreover, Corollary 1 and Corollary ?? continue to apply,
given that the cutoﬀs that apply here are deﬁned in the same way as (1), but with the terms
in NI and NE increased by zero or one depending on the type of beliefs. By the same logic,
other results similarly carry over.
Taking the diﬀerence in cutoﬀs when beliefs favor I vs. when beliefs are Pareto, we obtain
∆(NI+1,NE)−∆(NI+1,NE+1) = (1 −δ)


NE−NE−1∑
j=0
δj(fE(NE + j+ 1) −fE(NE + j))

,
(7)
which is strictly positive whenever NE < NE.6 The expression in (7) is a measure of the
distortion that arises in the cutoﬀ for E to win due to I’s favorable beliefs, as compared to
the socially optimal outcome. It shows that whether I is close or far away from its learning
threshold is irrelevant to the distortion implied by I enjoying favorable beliefs. This is because
under both types of beliefs, consumers evaluate the PDV of future product improvements
that can be oﬀered by I assuming I will win in every period. The expression (7) also illustrates
that the impact of beliefs on I’s competitive advantage reﬂects that E is eﬀectively viewed
by consumers as being one period of learning behind in every period under beliefs that favor
I compared to under Pareto beliefs.
Taking the diﬀerence between (7) evaluated at NE −k and (7) evaluated at NE, the
following result follows almost immediately.
Proposition 11. Suppose there is across-user learning and within-period learning. If E’s
learning function fE is weakly concave, the distortion in the cutoﬀ resulting from beliefs
favoring I is higher the further away E is from its maximum learning threshold (i.e. the
lower NE is).
6When NE = NE, beliefs are irrelevant, and (7) is zero.
24

=== PAGE 25 / 44 ===

This result reﬂects that shifting E back by one period of learning has a bigger eﬀect when
E is on the steeper (i.e. earlier) part of its learning function, and that the corresponding
disadvantage for E arises over additional periods when E is further away from its maximum
learning threshold. Put more directly, under the conditions of Proposition 11, the concern
that beliefs favoring I give I an ineﬃcient advantage is greater the further away E is from its
maximum learning threshold.
5.2 Across-user learning with one-time purchase
Consider the model of pure across-user learning from Section 3, but now assume con-
sumers only need to purchase once to derive consumption utility over all subsequent periods
based on the value of the product oﬀered in each period. Thus, we have in mind products
that can be used over multiple periods of time, e.g. operating systems, software, apps and
connected devices that are purchased upfront and can be used repeatedly at no additional
cost thereafter. We assume there is a measure one of new consumers joining in each pe-
riod and all consumers are inﬁnitely lived. These consumers purchase one of the two ﬁrms’
products and get to enjoy the stream of future utility associated with their choice of prod-
uct. Consumers could, if they wanted, switch to use the other product in any period, but
this would require purchasing that product as well. Finally, consistent with our baseline
model of across-user learning with new consumers in each period, a ﬁrm only learns once
from any consumer it sells to. Formally, if ﬁrm i has sold to a total measure of Ni unique
consumers in the past, then the value current consumers obtain from ﬁrm i’s product is
si + fi
(
min
{
Ni,Ni
})
, where Ni is the total measure of unique past sales it takes for ﬁrm i
to reach the maximum threshold of learning.
Once again, there can be multiple equilibria in consumers’ decision of which ﬁrm to buy
from, given prices in any period. Here, network eﬀects arise despite the absence of any within-
period learning, and are due to the repeated usage consumers enjoy from a purchase, which
creates a type of switching cost. If a consumer buys a product and then decides to switch
to the other product in a later period, she needs to purchase the other product, whereas she
could have continued to consume the existing product without any further payment. This
means that, all other things equal, consumers prefer to buy the product which they expect
will also be bought by current and future consumer cohorts, because that product will beneﬁt
from the most learning in the future. Because of this switching cost, each consumer now
has an incentive to coordinate her purchase decision with the purchase decisions of the other
consumers arriving in the same period.
Beliefs once again play an important role and, like in the previous subsection, we highlight
25

=== PAGE 26 / 44 ===

their eﬀect by comparing the outcomes with Pareto beliefs vs. beliefs that always favor I.
The diﬀerence relative to the previous section is that here the beliefs of the current cohort
of consumers must also include the behavior of future cohorts of consumers. Speciﬁcally, the
current cohort of consumers believe future cohorts will choose the same ﬁrm as the current
cohort. These beliefs always turn out to be fulﬁlled in equilibrium because the ﬁrm that
wins the current period has a higher competitive advantage and therefore always wins in all
future periods.
The proof, which is lengthy, follows similar steps as the proof of Proposition 1. We
relegate it to the Online Appendix, where we establish the following proposition.
Proposition 12. Suppose I has previously sold to 0 ≤NI ≤NI unique consumers and E
has previously sold to 0 ≤NE ≤NE unique consumers. Under Pareto beliefs, E wins if and
only if sE −sI ≥∆(NI,NE), where
∆(NI,NE) = (1 −δ)2


NI−NI−1∑
j=0
(j+ 1)δjfI(NI + j) −
NE−NE−1∑
j=0
(j+ 1)δjfE(NE + j)


+δNI−NI(1 + (1−δ)(NI −NI))fI(NI) −δNE−NE(1 + (1−δ)(NE −NE))fE(NE).
In contrast, under favorable beliefs for I, E wins if and only if sE −sI ≥∆I(NI,NE), where
∆I(NI,NE) = (1 −δ)2


NI−NI−1∑
j=0
(j+ 1)δjfI(NI + j) −
NE−NE−1∑
j=0
δjfE(NE + j)


+δNI−NI(1 + (1−δ)(NI −NI))fI(NI) −δNE−NEfE(NE).
The cutoﬀ in sE −sI above which E wins with Pareto beliefs is socially eﬃcient and lower
than the cutoﬀ in sE −sI above which E wins with beliefs favorable to I, i.e. ∆(NI,NE) <
∆I(NI,NE) for all (NI,NE) such that 0 ≤NI ≤NI and 0 ≤NE ≤NE −1.
To understand this result, note that in each state, consumers evaluate the ﬁrms based
on the utility they oﬀer in the current period (which reﬂects the ﬁrms’ additional learning),
plus the subsidy each ﬁrm oﬀers in the current period (reﬂecting how much each ﬁrm stands
to beneﬁt if it is able to capture consumers in the current period relative to the case when
it loses the current period), plus the PDV of the future utility stream that the consumer
expects will be oﬀered in all subsequent periods. The ﬁrms’ value functions are deﬁned in
the proof of Proposition 12. They turn out to be identical to the expressions in Corollary
1 except that the ∆( NI,NE) is now deﬁned as above (and depends on whether beliefs are
26

=== PAGE 27 / 44 ===

Pareto or favor I), and that we need to divide everywhere by an additional 1 −δ in order to
reﬂect that consumers get an inﬁnite stream of future beneﬁts from the product when they
purchase. The ( j+ 1) factors in the expression of ∆( NI,NE) in the proposition reﬂect that
now the learning levels fI(NI + j) and fE(NI + j) are enjoyed not just by the current cohort
of consumers, but also by the next j cohorts.
Proposition 12 shows that beliefs clearly aﬀect E’s ability to win: E wins more often under
Pareto beliefs relative to favorable beliefs for I. Moreover, like in the case of within-period
learning analyzed in the previous subsection, favorable beliefs for I lead to a socially ineﬃcient
cutoﬀ rule, in which I sometimes wins even though it would be eﬃcient for consumers to
buy from E.
5.3 Across-user and within-user learning
In this ﬁnal section we demonstrate that by combining across-user and within-user learn-
ing we can generate network eﬀects that create a coordination problem for consumers. In
particular, we shut down the channels that led to such network eﬀects in the previous two
sections—within-period learning (Section 5.1), and switching costs that arise via prices (Sec-
tion 5.2). We do so by combining the models of Sections 3 and 4 in the following way. First,
we assume that the value a given consumer obtains from ﬁrm i’s product in the current
period depends on the two types of learning—the total measure of consumers who have
previously purchased from the same ﬁrm, and the number of times the same consumer has
previously purchased from the same ﬁrm. Second, we set the prices of both ﬁrms to zero in
all periods to show that prices are not necessary to obtain our result (meaning our theory
can also apply to free products, such as Google search). Thus, while consumers can only
consume from one ﬁrm in a given period, they are free to switch between the two ﬁrms across
periods. And ﬁnally, we assume there is just one ﬁxed set of consumers of measure one who
are present in all periods, consistent with the model of within-user learning used in Section
4.
A consumer who has previously consumed ni times from ﬁrm i ∈{I,E}when ﬁrm i
has previously served Ni ≤1 of all consumers in the past derives utility si + fA(Ni) +
fW (min {ni,n}) in the current period if she chooses ﬁrm i’s product, where n ≥1 is the
threshold level of within-user learning for either ﬁrm. We assume the learning functions fA
and fW are everywhere weakly increasing and identical across ﬁrms. Thus, the maximum
utility that can ever be oﬀered by ﬁrm ito an individual consumer in a period is si+fA(1)+
fW (n), which is achieved when all consumers have chosen ﬁrm i at least n times in the
past. Without loss of generality, we assume that fA(1) >f A(0) = 0, and that fW is strictly
27

=== PAGE 28 / 44 ===

increasing in the last step to reach its maximum threshold (i.e. fW(n) > fW(n−1)) with
fW (0) = 0.
Here, a coordination problem arises because of the endogenous switching cost created
by within-user learning, which provides a reason for each consumer to want to coordinate
on the ﬁrm that will attract the other consumers, in order to also beneﬁt from across-
user learning. For example, if all consumers are expected to choose I in every period, a
consumer that chooses E in every period would forgo the beneﬁts of across-user learning,
while a consumer that switches between the two ﬁrms at least once would not be reaping
the maximum beneﬁts of within-user learning. Of course, when both ﬁrms have reached
maximum learning (i.e. when both have served all consumers n times in the past so they
oﬀer utility sI+fA(1)+fW (n) and sE+fA(1)+fW (n), respectively), there is no coordination
problem: the unique equilibrium has consumers choosing I in every period if sI > sE, and
otherwise choosing E in every period. In order to clearly illustrate how network eﬀects create
a coordination problem for consumers in this setting, we focus on the case in which both
ﬁrms start with a blank slate, that is, NI = NE = 0 and nI = nE = 0.
It turns out that in this setting there are only two pure-strategy equilibria, i.e. equilibria
in which all users who are in the same state choose the same action in every period: (i) all
consumers choose I in every period (I-wins), (ii) all consumers choose E in every period (E-
wins). The respective conditions for each equilibrium (I-wins or E-wins) are pinned down by
ruling out a consumer’s two best deviations. These two deviations turn out to be (i) switching
to the other ﬁrm for all periods, and (ii) starting on the other ﬁrm for one period and then
switching to the ﬁrm that is supposed to win all periods in equilibrium from period 2 onwards
(this involves free-riding on the across-user learning generated by all other consumers). In
the Appendix, we formally prove this, and determine the ranges of parameter values under
which the two equilibria exist, which are as follows:
•if sE −sI < −δmin
{
fA(1) ,(1 −δ) ∑n
j=1 δj−1fW (j) + δnfW (n)
}
, then I-wins is the
unique equilibrium.
•if sE −sI ≥δmin
{
fA(1) ,(1 −δ) ∑n
j=1 δj−1fW (j) + δnfW (n)
}
, then E-wins is the
unique equilibrium.
•in the remaining range of sE −sI, both I-wins and E-wins equilibria exist.
The multiplicity of equilibria in the third parameter range creates the possibility for
consumer beliefs to determine which equilibrium gets selected. Under Pareto beliefs, in case
there are multiple equilibria, consumers coordinate on the equilibrium that yields a higher
PDV of surplus for them, which means E wins if and only if sE −sI ≥0. In contrast,
28

=== PAGE 29 / 44 ===

under beliefs that favor I, the only way for E to possibly win is when E-wins is the unique
equilibrium (the second case above), since this rules out the equilibrium in which consumers
choose I in every period. The next proposition summarizes our ﬁndings.
Proposition 13. Suppose both ﬁrms start with no previous learning, i.e. NI = NE = 0 and
nI = nE = 0 for every consumer. Under Pareto beliefs, E wins if and only if sE −sI ≥0,
which is the socially optimal cutoﬀ given the two ﬁrms are otherwise symmetric. Under
favorable beliefs for I, E wins if and only if
sE −sI ≥δmin
{
fA(1),(1 −δ)
n∑
j=1
δj−1fW (j) + δnfW (n)
}
,
i.e. the cutoﬀ for E to win is too high in this case compared to the socially optimal cutoﬀ.
Like in the two previous sections, beliefs that favor I shift the outcome in I’s favor relative
to the case with Pareto beliefs, which remains socially optimal. It is important to emphasize
that both types of learning are necessary for network eﬀects to matter in this model. If
either type of learning is shut down (i.e. if either fA(1) = 0 or fW(j) = 0 for all j), then
the condition for E to win under beliefs favorable to I becomes identical to the condition for
E to win under Pareto beliefs, so the nature of beliefs and network eﬀects no longer matter.
6 Conclusion
Data-enabled learning is becoming an essential ingredient to the competitive dynamics
between providers of an increasing range of products and services. Our analysis provides
several key take-aways regarding the determinants of a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage in the
presence of data-enabled learning. First, we have shown that the proﬁts extracted by the
winning ﬁrm are higher under across-user learning than within-user learning. This suggests
that competitive positions built around across-user learning should be more defensible than
those built around within-user learning. Second, everything else equal, a ﬁrm’s advantage (in
winning) is greater, the higher is its learning curve, the further along the ﬁrm is on its learning
curve, and the higher is the remaining learning potential. However, even if an incumbent
starts with a data advantage, if the entrant’s learning curve is steeper and can ultimately
reach a higher threshold of learning value, through dynamic pricing the entrant may be able
to seize the market. Third, data-enabled learning creates a user coordination problem due
to network eﬀects when across-user learning is combined with either (i) continued product
improvement during the period(s) over which consumers derive utility from the product, or
29

=== PAGE 30 / 44 ===

(ii) within-user learning. In these cases, favorable user expectations towards the incumbent
can be another important source of competitive advantage.
Even when the equilibrium outcome with data-enabled learning is socially eﬃcient, an
unanticipated improvement in the learning of the losing ﬁrm helps consumers. This creates
a potential role for a data sharing policy. However, if such a policy is anticipated, it creates
a tradeoﬀ in terms of consumer surplus: the enhanced competitive position of the losing ﬁrm
after data is shared tends to lower prices, but the losing ﬁrm is now less likely to subsidize in
order to win prior to data being shared, which tends to increase prices. Taking into account
this tradeoﬀ, we’ve shown that a key condition for data sharing policy to improve consumer
surplus is that the ﬁrm that beneﬁts from data sharing is suﬃciently far behind the leader.
The analysis in this paper showed how data-enabled learning can give rise to endogenous
switching costs and endogenous network eﬀects. Powerful platform businesses like those
run by Amazon, Facebook and Google beneﬁt from data-enabled learning, but in addition,
they also enjoy traditional direct network eﬀects. An interesting direction for future work,
building on our model, is to consider how data-enabled learning works when combined with
direct network eﬀects.
7 Appendix
This appendix contains the proofs of results not already proven in the main text.
7.1 Proof of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1
The state (NI,NE) = (NI,NE) is already handled in the main text. Recall the value function
of proﬁt in this case is given by
Vi(NI,NE) = 1
1 −δmax
{
si −sj + fi(Ni) −fj(Nj),0
}
.
Consider the case with NI = NI and 1 ≤NE ≤NE. Suppose ∆( NI,NE), VI(NI,NE) and
VE(NI,NE) are given by ∆(NI,NE), VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) as characterized in Proposition
1 and Corollary 1 with NI = NI (this is the induction hypothesis).
Now consider the case in which NI = NI and E has previously sold to NE −1 consumers.
Suppose E charges pE and I charges pI in the current period. I wins the current period if sI +
fI(NI) −pI > sE + fE(NE −1) −pE. Otherwise, E wins. If E wins the current period, the
PDV of its current and future proﬁts will be pE −c+ δVE(NI,NE). If it doesn’t win the current
period, the PDV of its current and future proﬁts will be δVE(NI,NE −1). So E is willing to
price down to the point where pE −c+ δVE(NI,NE) = δVE(NI,NE −1), or in other words
30

=== PAGE 31 / 44 ===

pE = c−δ(VE(NI,NE) −VE(NI,NE −1)). Based on the same logic, I is willing to price down to
pI = c−δ(VI(NI,NE −1) −VI(NI,NE)).
Thus, if we denote by Ω i(NI,NE) the maximum surplus ﬁrm i is willing to oﬀer consumers to
win in the current period when the current state is ( NI,NE), then
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
= sI −c+ fI(NI) + δ(VI(NI,NE −1) −VI(NI,NE)) (8)
ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
= sE −c+ fE(NE −1) + δ(VE(NI,NE) −VE(NI,NE −1)). (9)
Given Bertrand competition, I wins the current period iﬀ
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
>ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
. (10)
Suppose (10) holds. Then in the current period E setspE = c−δ(VE(NI,NE)−VE(NI,NE−1))
and I wins by setting pI = sI + fI(NI) −ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
. Then I’s value is
VI(NI,NE −1) = δVI(NI,NE) + ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
−ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
,
and E’s value is VE(NI,NE −1) = δVE(NI,NE −1) given it loses and so will be in the same
situation next period. Since δ <1, this implies VE(NI,NE −1) = 0.
Conversely, suppose (10) doesn’t hold. Then in the current period I setspI = c−δ(VI(NI,NE−
1) −VI(NI,NE)) and E wins by setting pE = sE+ fE(NE−1) −ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
. Then E’s value
is
VE(NI,NE −1) = δVE(NI,NE −1) + ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
−ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
and I’s value is VI(NI,NE −1) = δVI(NI,NE) given it loses and will be in the state ( NI,NE)
next period.
Combining the above two cases when (10) holds and when it doesn’t, we have
VI(NI,NE −1) = δVI(NI,NE) + max
{
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
−ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
,0
}
(11)
VE(NI,NE −1) = δVE(NI,NE −1) + max
{
ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
−ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
,0
}
.(12)
There are two possibilities: VE(NI,NE −1) = 0 and VE(NI,NE −1) >0.
Suppose ﬁrst VE(NI,NE−1) = 0. We can solve (11) for VI(NI,NE−1) using the expressions
for VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) from the induction hypothesis and the fact thatVE(NI,NE−1) =
0, which gives
VI(NI,NE −1) =
{ sI−sE+fI(NI)−fE(NE−1)
1−δ if sE −sI <∆(NI,NE)
sI−sE+(1−δ)(fI(NI)−fE(NE−1))+δ∆(NI,NE)
(1−δ)2 if sE −sI ≥∆(NI,NE)
,
31

=== PAGE 32 / 44 ===

with VI(NI,NE −1) ≥0 iﬀ
sE −sI ≤(1 −δ)(fI(NI) −fE(NE −1)) + δ∆(NI,NE) = ∆(NI,NE −1).
Next, suppose VE(NI,NE−1) >0, so VI(NI,NE−1) = δVI(NI,NE). Since VI (
NI,NE −1
)
≥
VI (
NI,NE
)
, we must have VI(NI,NE −1) = VI(NI,NE) = 0 in this case. We can solve (12) for
VE(NI,NE −1) using the expression for VE(NI,NE) from the induction hypothesis and the fact
that VI(NI,NE −1) = VI(NI,NE) = 0, which gives
VE(NI,NE −1) = sE −sI + (1 −δ)(fE(NE −1) −fI(NI)) −δ∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ ,
which is positive iﬀ sE −sI >∆(NI,NE −1).
Thus, combining the results with VE(NI,NE −1) = 0 and VE(NI,NE −1) > 0, we have
proven that ∆(NI,NE −1), VI(NI,NE −1) and VE(NI,NE −1) satisfy the characterization in
Proposition 1 and Corollary 1, and by induction, this is true for any 0 ≤NE ≤NE when NI = NI.
Symmetry can be used to obtain a parallel result for all 0 ≤NI ≤NI when NE = NE.
Now consider any state (NI,NE) with 0 ≤NI ≤NI−1 and 0 ≤NE ≤NE−1, and suppose that
the results in Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 hold for the states (NI+1,NE) and (NI,NE+1)—this
is the induction hypothesis. Using the same logic as above when the state is ( NI,NE), we have
VI(NI,NE) = δVI(NI,NE + 1) + max{Ω (NI,NE) ,0} (13)
VE(NI,NE) = δVE(NI + 1,NE) + max{−Ω (NI,NE) ,0} (14)
where
Ω (NI,NE) = sI + fI(NI) + δ(VI(NI + 1,NE) −VI(NI,NE + 1))
−sE −fE(NE) −δ
(
VE(NI,NE + 1) −VE(NI + 1,NE)
)
.
Again there are two possibilities, depending on whether Ω ( NI,NE) is positive or not. If
Ω (NI,NE) ≥0, then we must have VE(NI,NE) = VE(NI + 1,NE) = 0, while if Ω ( NI,NE) ≤0,
then we must have VI(NI,NE) = VI(NI,NE + 1) = 0. In each of these two cases, we can use the
expressions of VI(NI,NE+1) and VE(NI+1,NE) from the induction hypothesis to solve (13) and
(14) for VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE). After some careful manipulations, which include rewriting
the resulting summation expressions for VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) in terms of ∆( NI,NE) and
∆(NI,NE+1), we conﬁrm that the expressions of ∆(NI,NE), VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) satisfy
the characterization in Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 (these additional details are provided in the
Online Appendix).
By repeated application of the induction hypothesis, we obtain that the expressions forVI(NI,NE)
and VE(NI,NE) in Corollary 1, and the expression for ∆( NI,NE) in Proposition 1 hold for all
32

=== PAGE 33 / 44 ===

states (NI,NE), where 0 ≤NI ≤NI −1 and 0 ≤NE ≤NE −1.
7.2 Proof of Proposition 2
To show Proposition 1 continues to apply in the limit as NI →∞ and NE →∞, we need
to prove the expression in (1) continues to be well deﬁned in this limit case. This is equivalent
to proving limNi→∞
∑Ni
j=0 δjfi(j) exists given this also implies lim Ni→∞ δNifi(Ni) exists since the
summation includes the later expression and other positive terms. Consider the power function
fi(x) = θixρi where θi > 0 and ρi > 0. Using the ratio test, we know that lim j→∞(δj+1(j+1)ρ
δjjρ ) =
δ <1 which implies the limit exists for any such power function. Then by the limit comparison
test, since the relevant terms are all positive, the limits exist for any unbounded learning function
fi provided there exists some κi >0, such that limj→∞
fi(j)
jρ ≤κi for i= {I,E}.
7.3 Proof of Proposition 3
If NI = NE = N and sE −sI <0, then I wins and E makes zero proﬁts regardless of whether
N <N or N = N. If N = N, then I’s PDV of proﬁts is VI (
N,N
)
= sI−sE
1−δ . If instead N <N,
then I’s PDV of proﬁts is
VI (N,N ) =
{ sI−sE
1−δ −δ∆(N,N+1)
(1−δ)2 if sE −sI <∆(N,N + 1)
sI−sE
(1−δ)2 if ∆( N,N + 1) ≤sE −sI <0
,
which is clearly always larger than sI−sE
1−δ , given that ∆( N,N + 1) <0 = ∆(N,N ). By symmetry,
the same holds when sE −sI >0.
Now suppose there is some asymmetry between the two ﬁrms’ learning functions, and we have
NI > NI, NE > NE and sE −sI = ∆(NI,NE). This means that Vi(NI,NE) = 0 for i∈{I,E}.
In contrast, if NI = NI, NE = NE, then Vi(NI,NE) = max
{si−sj+fi(Ni)−fj(Nj)
1−δ ,0
}
for i ̸= j ∈
{NI,NE}. Thus, as long as fI (NI)−fE(NE) ̸= ∆(NI,NE), one ﬁrm sees its proﬁts strictly increase
when the prospect of future learning is eliminated (the other ﬁrm’s proﬁt remains equal to zero).
By continuity, this remains true when sE −sI is suﬃciently close to ∆( NI,NE).
7.4 Proof of Proposition 4
Consider the socially optimal outcome. If I wins in every period, the value created is
sI
1 −δ + δNI−NI+1
1 −δ fI(NI) +
NI−NI∑
j=0
δjfI(NI + j)
33

=== PAGE 34 / 44 ===

while if E wins in every period, the value created is
sE
1 −δ + δNE−NE+1
1 −δ fE(NE) +
NE−NE∑
j=0
δjfE(NE + j).
The socially optimal cutoﬀ is the level of sI −sE for which these two expressions are equal, which
corresponds exactly to the equilibrium cutoﬀ ∆( NI,NE).
7.5 Proof of Proposition 5
Given that E moves to the threshold level of data at the end of each period with probability
0 ≤λ ≤1 which is independent of the ﬁrm’s current position, the maximum surplus ﬁrm E and
I are willing to oﬀer consumers to win are given by the same expressions (8)-(9) except that δ is
replaced by δ(1 −λ). We can derive the value functions and the cutoﬀ for E to win following the
same steps as in Proposition 1 and Corollary 1. The main diﬀerence is that it is now possible for
both ﬁrms to have positive value. The full details are relegated to the Online Appendix, where
we also show that ∆( N,NE,λ) is increasing in λ, a property we use below. The resulting value
functions are:
VI(N,NE,λ) =



sI−sE
1−δ + f(N)−f(NE)
1−δ(1−λ) if sE −sI <∆(N,N,λ) = 0
sI−sE+f(N)−f(NE)
1−δ(1−λ) if ∆( N,N,λ) ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE + 1,λ)
sI−sE+∆(N,NE,λ)
(1−δ(1−λ))2 if ∆( N,NE + 1,λ) ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ)
0 if sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ)
(15)
VE(N,NE,λ) =



0 if sE −sI <∆(N,N,λ) = 0
δλ
1−δ(1−λ)
sE−sI
1−δ if ∆( N,N,λ) ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ)
sE−sI
1−δ −∆(N,NE,λ)
1−δ(1−λ) if sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ)
. (16)
The PDV of consumer surplus is determined by the surplus oﬀered by the losing ﬁrm in each
period along the equilibrium path taking into account E’s chances of shifting to the threshold.
There are four diﬀerent cases.
1. Suppose sE −sI < ∆(N,N,λ) = 0. This means I always wins, E never subsidizes, and
consumers get the surplus oﬀered by E which is sE + f(NE) −c each period until I shares
its data, and sE + f
(
N
)
−c each period after I shares its data. Since f
(
N
)
>f (NE), the
PDV of consumer surplus is increasing in λ.
2. Suppose 0 = ∆( N,N,λ) ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE + 1,λ). This means I wins every period until
E catches up, after which E wins forever. However, in this range, since even if E somehow
manages to win one period, it will still not win the following period (without I sharing its
data), it will not subsidize. Thus, consumers get sE+f(NE)−ceach period until I shares its
34

=== PAGE 35 / 44 ===

data and sI+f
(
N
)
−ceach period after I shares its data. Since sE−sI <∆(N,NE+1,λ) <
f
(
N
)
−f(NE), the PDV of consumer surplus is increasing in λ. Note this range only exists
if NE ≤N −2.
3. Suppose ∆( N,NE + 1,λ) ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ). In this range, consumer surplus is the
same as in case 2 except now consumer surplus is higher because E oﬀers a subsidy of
δ(1 −λ)
(
VE(N,NE + 1) −VE(N,NE)
)
= δ(1 −λ)
(
sE −sI −∆(N,NE + 1,λ)
)
1 −δ(1 −λ) (17)
each period until I shares its data. This subsidy reﬂects that if E manages to win one period,
it will thereafter win in all following periods even if I doesn’t share its data. Using (15)-(16),
the PDV of consumer surplus can be written as
sE −sI −∆(N,NE,λ)
(1 −δ(1 −λ))2 + sI + f
(
N
)
−c
1 −δ
and the change in consumer surplus due to data sharing when sE −sI = x is therefore
∆CS(x,λ) ≡x−∆(N,NE,λ)
(1 −δ(1 −λ))2 −x−∆(N,NE,0)
(1 −δ)2 .
Clearly, ∆CS(x,λ) is decreasing in x. Furthermore, when x= ∆(N,NE,λ), we have
∆CS
(
∆(N,NE,λ),λ
)
= ∆(N,NE,0) −∆(N,NE,λ)
(1 −δ)2 <0.
Finally, when sE −sI = ∆(N,NE + 1,λ), the subsidy in (17) is exactly zero and the change
in consumer surplus due to data sharing is identical to that arising in case 2 for the same
value of sE −sI, which recall is positive. Thus, we have ∆ CS
(
∆(N,NE + 1,λ),λ
)
>0. So
we conclude there exists a unique Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
∈
(
∆(N,NE + 1,λ),∆(N,NE,λ)
)
such that
∆CS
(
Θa(
N,NE,λ
)
,λ
)
= 0, which indeed has the solution given by (3).
4. Finally, suppose sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE). This means E wins in every period. Since we must
also have sE −sI >0, I will never subsidize in this region. Thus, consumers always get the
surplus oﬀered by I when it loses and prices at c. As a result, the PDV of consumer surplus
is independent of λ.
7.6 Proof of Proposition 7
To prove the result in (i) we need to show that the term (in large brackets) multiplied by θI
in (4) is greater than the corresponding term multiplied by θE when NI −NI ≤NE −NE and
NI −NI ≥NE −NE, with one inequality strict.
35

=== PAGE 36 / 44 ===

If NE ≤NE and NI ≤NI, then the inequality we require simpliﬁes to
δNI−NI+1
(
1 −δNI−NI
)
>δNE−NE+1
(
1 −δNE−NE
)
,
which follows by combining the above assumptions. If NE >N E and NI >N I, then the inequality
we require simpliﬁes to
NI −NI + δ1 −δNI−NI
1 −δ >NE −NE + δ1 −δNE−NE
1 −δ ,
which once again can be shown to follow from the above assumptions. Finally, given NI −NI ≤
NE −NE and NI −NI ≥NE −NE, the only remaining case is NE ≤NE and NI >N I. In this
case, the inequality we wish to prove becomes
NI −NI + δ
(
1 −δNI−NI
1 −δ
)
>δNE−NE+1
(
1 −δNE−NE
1 −δ
)
.
The LHS is lowest when NI = NI + 1 while the RHS is highest when NE = NE, so a suﬃcient
condition for the inequality to hold is that
1 + δ
(
1 −δNI−NI−1
1 −δ
)
>δ
(
1 −δNE−NE
1 −δ
)
or equivalently 1 −δNI−NI >δ
(
1 −δNE−NE
)
, which holds because NI −NI ≥NE −NE.
For (ii), suppose NI + k ≤N, which implies NE + k < Nbecause NI > NE. Then imposing
that learning functions are identical on (4), we get
∆(NI + k,NE + k) −∆(NI,NE) = (1 −δk)(1 −δN−N)(δN−NI −δN−NE)θ
(1 −δ)δN−N+k−1 >0.
Suppose instead NI >N and NE >N . Then
∆(NI + k,NE + k) −∆(NI,NE) = −(1 −δk)(δN−NI+1 −δN−NE+1)θ
(1 −δ)δk ,
which is negative given NI >NE.
7.7 Proof of Proposition 8
As discussed in the text, the analysis can be conducted with a representative consumer. A key
diﬀerence with the proof of Proposition 1 is that we need to construct the value function for the
consumer since the consumer needs to take future utility into account when deciding which ﬁrm to
buy from. We denote this u(NI,NE), which measures the PDV of surplus a consumer expects to
36

=== PAGE 37 / 44 ===

obtain from making her optimal choices in every stage when ﬁrms play their equilibrium strategies
and the consumer has previously bought NI times from ﬁrm I and NE times from ﬁrm E.
It is easily veriﬁed that when ( NI,NE) = (NI,NE), we have
VI(NI,NE) = max
{
sI + fI(NI) −sE −fE(NE),0
}
1 −δ
VE(NI,NE) = max
{
sE + fE(NE) −sI −fI(NI),0
}
1 −δ
u(NI,NE) = min
{
sI + fI(NI),sE + fE(NE)
}
−c
1 −δ .
Consider the case with NI = NI and 1 ≤NE ≤NE. Suppose that ∆(NI,NE), VI(NI,NE) and
VE(NI,NE) are given by ∆(NI,NE), VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) as characterized in Proposition
8 with NI = NI, and that the corresponding value function for consumers is
u(NI,NE) = min


fI(NI) + sI + δfI(NI) −c
1 −δ ,
NE−NE∑
j=0
δjfE(NE + j) + sE + δNE−NE+1fE(NE) −c
1 −δ


.
This is the induction hypothesis.
Consider now the state ( NI,NE −1). The consumer chooses I in the current period iﬀ
sI + fI(NI) −pI + δu(NI,NE −1) >sE + fE(NE −1) −pE + δu(NI,NE).
I is willing to set pI down to the point where it is indiﬀerent between winning or losing the current
period, i.e. pI = c−δ(VI(NI,NE −1) −VI(NI,NE)). Similarly, E is willing to set pE down to
pE = c−δ(VE(NI,NE) −VE(NI,NE −1)).
If we denote by Ωi(NI,NE) the PDV of the maximum surplus ﬁrmiis willing to oﬀer consumers
to win in the current period when the current state is ( NI,NE), then
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
= sI −c+ fI(NI) + δ(VI(NI,NE −1) −VI(NI,NE) + u(NI,NE −1))
ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
= sE −c+ fE(NE −1) + δ(VE(NI,NE) −VE(NI,NE −1) + u(NI,NE)).
Given Bertrand competition, I wins the current period iﬀ
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
>ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
.
Using the same logic as in the Proof of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1, we obtain
u(NI,NE −1) = min
{
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
,ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)}
(18)
VI(NI,NE −1) = δVI(NI,NE) + max
{
ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
−ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
,0
}
(19)
VE(NI,NE −1) = δVE(NI,NE −1) + max
{
ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
−ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
,0
}
.(20)
37

=== PAGE 38 / 44 ===

There are two possibilities: ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
≥ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
or ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
<ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
.
Suppose ﬁrst Ω I (
NI,NE −1
)
≥ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
, which immediately implies VE(NI,NE −
1) = 0. Using the expressions of VI(NI,NE), VE(NI,NE) and u(NI,NE) from the induction
hypothesis, we then solve (18) and (19) for VI(NI,NE −1) and u(NI,NE −1) to obtain
VI(NI,NE −1) = sI −sE + ∆(NI,NE −1)
1 −δ
u(NI,NE −1) = sE + δNE−NE+2fE(NE) −c
1 −δ +
NE−NE+1∑
j=0
δjfE(NE −1 + j). (21)
Now suppose ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
<ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
, which means E wins the current period, so
VI(NI,NE −1) = δVI(NI,NE), which implies VI(NI,NE −1) = VI(NI,NE) = 0 because we
must have VI(NI,NE −1) ≥VI(NI,NE). Furthermore, (18) and (20) become
u(NI,NE −1) = sI + fI(NI) −c
1 −δ (22)
VE(NI,NE −1) = sE −sI −∆(NI,NE −1)
1 −δ .
Thus, combining the results with Ω I (
NI,NE −1
)
≥ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
and ΩI (
NI,NE −1
)
<
ΩE(
NI,NE −1
)
, we have proven that ∆( NI,NE −1), VI(NI,NE −1) and VE(NI,NE −1)
satisfy the characterization in Proposition 8, and u(NI,NE −1) is given by the minimum of the
two expressions in (21) and (22). By induction, this is true for any 0 ≤NE ≤NE when NI = NI.
Symmetry can then be used to obtain a parallel result for all 0 ≤NI ≤NI when NE = NE.
Now consider any state (NI,NE) with 0 ≤NI ≤NI −1 and 0 ≤NE ≤NE −1. The induction
hypothesis is that the result in Proposition 8 holds for the states ( NI + 1,NE) and ( NI,NE + 1)
and that the value functions for consumers in these two states are
u(NI + 1,NE) = min



∑NI−NI−1
j=0 δjfI(NI + 1 +j) + sI+δNI−NIfI(NI)−c
1−δ ,
∑NE−NE
j=0 δjfE(NE + j) + sE+δNE−NE+1fE(NE)−c
1−δ



u(NI,NE + 1) = min



∑NI−NI
j=0 δjfI(NI + j) + sI+δNI−NI+1fI(NI)−c
1−δ ,
∑NE−NE+1
j=0 δjfE(NE + 1 +j) + sE+δNE−NEfE(NE)−c
1−δ


.
Using the same logic as above, we have
u(NI,NE) = min
{
ΩI(NI,NE),ΩE(NI,NE)
}
, (23)
38

=== PAGE 39 / 44 ===

where
ΩI(NI,NE) = sI −c+ fI(NI) + δ(VI(NI + 1,NE) −VI(NI,NE + 1) +u(NI + 1,NE))
ΩE(NI,NE) = sE −c+ fE(NE) + δ(VE(NI,NE + 1) −VE(NI + 1,NE) + u(NI,NE + 1))
and
VI(NI,NE) = δVI(NI,NE + 1) + max{Ω(NI,NE),0} (24)
VE(NI,NE) = δVE(NI + 1,NE) + max{−Ω(NI,NE),0}, (25)
where Ω(NI,NE) ≡ΩI(NI,NE) −ΩE(NI,NE).
Again there are two possibilities, depending on whether Ω( NI,NE) >0 or not. If Ω( NI,NE) >
0, then we must have VE(NI,NE) = VE(NI + 1,NE) = 0, while if Ω( NI,NE) ≤0, then we must
have VI(NI,NE) = VI(NI,NE + 1) = 0. For each of these cases, we can use the expressions of
u(NI + 1,NE), u(NI,NE + 1), VI(NI,NE + 1) and VE(NI + 1,NE) from the induction hypothesis
to solve (23), (24) and (25) for VI(NI,NE), VE(NI,NE) and u(NI,NE). Then we can rewrite the
resulting summation expressions in VI(NI,NE) and VE(NI,NE) in terms of ∆( NI,NE) to obtain
VI(NI,NE) = max
{sI −sE + ∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ ,0
}
VE(NI,NE) = max
{sE −sI −∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ ,0
}
and
u(NI,NE) = min



∑NI−NI
j=0 δjfI(NI + j) + sI+δNI−NI+1fI(NI)−c
1−δ ,
∑NE−NE
j=0 δjfE(NE + j) + sE+δNE−NE+1fE(NE)−c
1−δ


.
By repeated application of the induction hypothesis, the result in Proposition 8 holds for all states
(NI,NE), with 0 ≤NI ≤NI and 0 ≤NE ≤NE.
Finally, we can conﬁrm that consumers do not want to switch ﬁrms along the equilibrium path.
Suppose the current state is ( NI,NE). If sE −sI < ∆(NI,NE), then consumers choose I in the
current period, so next period the state will be ( NI + 1,NE). Since ∆( NI,NE) is increasing in
NI, this means in the subsequent period consumers will choose I again, and so on until NI = NI.
When the state is ( NI,NE), all subsequent periods will have an identical state and outcome, in
which consumers choose I. Conversely, if sE −sI ≥∆(NI,NE), then consumers choose E in the
current period, so next period the state will be ( NI,NE+ 1). Since ∆(NI,NE) is decreasing in NE,
this means in the subsequent period consumers will choose E again, and so on until NE = NE.
At the state ( NI,NE), all subsequent periods will have an identical state and outcome, in which
consumers choose E.
39

=== PAGE 40 / 44 ===

7.8 Proof of Proposition 9
There are four diﬀerent cases, depending on the value of sE −sI. If sE −sI <∆(NI,NE + 1)
then VI(NI,NE) is higher under across-user learning since
sI −sE
1 −δ + ∆(NI,NE) −δ∆(NI,NE + 1)
(1 −δ)2 > sI −sE + ∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ >0
given ∆(NI,NE) >∆(NI,NE + 1). If ∆(NI,NE + 1) ≤sE −sI <∆(NI,NE), then VI(NI,NE) is
higher under across-user learning since
sI −sE + ∆(NI,NE)
(1 −δ)2 > sI −sE + ∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ >0.
If ∆(NI,NE) ≤sE −sI < ∆(NI + 1,NE), then VE(NI,NE) is higher under across-user learning
since
sE −sI −∆(NI,NE)
(1 −δ)2 > sE −sI −∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ >0.
Finally, if sE −sI ≥∆(NI + 1,NE), then VE(NI,NE) is higher under across-user learning since
sE −sI
1 −δ −∆(NI,NE) −δ∆(NI + 1,NE)
(1 −δ)2 > sE −sI −∆(NI,NE)
1 −δ >0
given ∆(NI + 1,NE) >∆(NI,NE).
7.9 Data sharing under within-user learning
Here we prove the results regarding data sharing under within-user learning claimed at the end
of Section 4. The logic parallels that used in the Proof of Proposition 5 but adjusted to take into
account in this case we have pure within-user learning. The details of obtaining the ﬁrms’ (and in
this case, the consumers’) value functions are relegated to the Online Appendix. There we show
that a representative user’s value function is
u(N,NE,λ) =



sE+f(N)−c
1−δ −∆(N,NE,λ)
1−δ(1−λ) if sE −sI <0
sE+f(N)−c
1−δ −∆(N,NE,λ)
1−δ(1−λ) + δλ
1−δ(1−λ)
sI−sE
1−δ if 0 ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ)
sI+f(N)−c
1−δ if sE −sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ)
and that (2) still characterizes the cutoﬀ in sE −sI, above which E wins.
To determine the eﬀect of data sharing on consumer surplus, we simply compare u(N,NE,λ)
to u(N,NE,0). There are three cases:
1. If sE−sI <0, then u(N,NE,λ) is increasing in λ, so data sharing increases consumer surplus.
40

=== PAGE 41 / 44 ===

2. If 0 ≤sE −sI <∆(N,NE,λ), then
u
(
N,NE,λ
)
−u
(
N,NE,0
)
= − δλ(sE −sI)
(1 −δ(1 −λ)) (1−δ) + ∆(N,NE,0)
1 −δ −∆(N,NE,λ)
1 −δ(1 −λ),
which is clearly decreasing in sE−sI. Furthermore, when sE−sI = 0, we have u
(
N,NE,λ
)
−
u
(
N,NE,0
)
>0. To see this, note that
∆(N,NE,λ)
1 −δ(1 −λ) =
N−NE−1∑
j=0
(δ(1 −λ))j (
f(N) −f(NE + j)
)
,
so ∆(N,NE,λ)
1−δ(1−λ) is decreasing in λ. And when sE −sI = ∆(N,NE,λ), we have
u
(
N,NE,λ
)
−u
(
N,NE,0
)
= ∆(N,NE,0) −∆(N,NE,λ)
1 −δ <0,
because recall from the Proof of Proposition 5 that ∆( N,NE,λ) is increasing in λ. Thus, we
can conclude that data sharing increases consumer surplus when 0≤sE−sI <Θw(
N,NE,λ
)
and decreases consumer surplus when Θ w(
N,NE,λ
)
< sE −sI < ∆(N,NE,λ), where
Θw(
N,NE,λ
)
is given by (6).
3. If sE−sI ≥∆(N,NE,λ), then u(N,NE,λ) is constant in λ, so data sharing has no eﬀect on
consumer surplus.
7.10 Proof of Proposition 13
The ﬁrst step to prove the result is to show the only pure-strategy equilibria involve consumers
always buying from I or always buying from E. It is easy to rule out equilibria in which consumers
switch more than once from one ﬁrm to the other. To rule out equilibria with one switch, we
show that there is always a proﬁtable deviation for a consumer: not switching at all, or switching
one period later than everyone else (i.e. free-riding on other consumers generating the across-user
learning), or else switching to the other ﬁrm earlier than everyone else because it must oﬀer higher
utility when the other two deviations are not proﬁtable. The details of the proof are a bit involved
and so relegated to the Online Appendix. Here we characterize the two candidate pure-strategy
equilibria.
To keep the notation streamlined, deﬁne
f
W
(n) ≡
{
fW (n) if n≤n
fW (n) if n> n
.
Consider the equilibrium in which consumers choose I in all periods. In this equilibrium, each
41

=== PAGE 42 / 44 ===

consumer gets a surplus of
sI
1 −δ + δ
1 −δfA(1) + δ
∞∑
j=1
δj−1f
W
(j) .
The optimal deviation by a consumer cannot involve switching more than once between I and
E. To see this, suppose the optimal deviation involves choosing E for the ﬁrst mE ≥1 periods,
then I for the next mI ≥1 periods, and then switching back to E in period mE + mI + 1. There
are two possible cases. If sE + f
W
(mE) ≥sI + fA(1) +f
W
(mI), then, regardless of the deviation
path from period mE + mI + 2 onwards, choosing E in every period yields a higher total payoﬀ:
it yields a strictly higher payoﬀ in every period from mE + 1 to mE + mI and a weakly higher
payoﬀ in all periods thereafter. If instead sE + f
W
(mE) <sI + fA(1) +f
W
(mI), then choosing I
from period mE + mI + 1 onwards yields a strictly higher payoﬀ. Thus, this cannot be an optimal
deviation. Similarly, suppose the optimal deviation involves choosing I for the ﬁrst mI ≥1 periods,
then E for the next mE ≥1 periods, and then switching back to I in period mI + mE + 1. If
sE + f
W
(mE) <sI + f
W
(mI) +fA(1), then choosing I in every period would yield a higher total
payoﬀ. If instead sE+f
W
(mE) ≥sI+f
W
(mI)+ fA(1), then choosing E from period mI+mE+1
onwards yields a strictly higher payoﬀ. So this cannot be an optimal deviation either.
Now suppose the optimal deviation involves choosing E for mE ≥1 periods and then choosing
I from period mE + 1 onwards. This means we must have sE + f
W
(mE) <sI + fA(1), otherwise
the payoﬀ would be higher by sticking to E forever. This implies that if mE > 1, then in period
mE −1 choosing I yields sI + fA(1), whereas choosing E yields sE + f
W
(mE), which is strictly
lower. Thus, the deviation payoﬀ could be increased by switching to I from period mE −1. So for
this to be an optimal deviation it must be that mE = 1.
Finally, suppose the optimal deviation involves choosing I formI ≥0 periods and then choosing
E from period mI + 1 onwards. If mI ≥1, this means we must have sE ≥sI + fA(1) + f
W
(mI),
otherwise the payoﬀ would be higher by sticking to I forever. But this implies sE ≥sI + fA(1) +
f
W
(mI −1), so the payoﬀ could be improved by switching to E in period mI. Consequently, for
this to be an optimal deviation, we must have mI = 0, i.e. choosing E in every period.
Thus, we have proven there are only two possible deviations that we need to consider. Either
a consumer chooses E in every period, or chooses E in period 1, waits for I’s product to improve
from across-user learning, and switches to I in period 2 and stays with I for all subsequent periods.
Considering these two optimal deviations, for always choosing I to be an equilibrium we need
sI
1 −δ + δ
1 −δfA(1) + δ
∞∑
j=1
δj−1f
W
(j)
≥ max



sE
1 −δ + δ
∞∑
j=1
δj−1f
W
(j) ,sE + δ
1 −δ
(
sI + fA(1)
)
+ δ2
∞∑
j=1
δj−1f
W
(j)



42

=== PAGE 43 / 44 ===

or equivalently,
sE −sI ≤δmin


fA(1) ,(1 −δ)
∞∑
j=1
δj−1f
W
(j)


.
By symmetry, for always choosing E to be an equilibrium we need
sE −sI ≥−δmin


fA(1) ,(1 −δ)
∞∑
j=1
δj−1f
W
(j)


.
This leads to the three possible parameter regions for sE −sI in Section 5.3. The rest of the
Proposition is proven in the main text.
References
Beggs, A. and P. Klemperer (1992) “Multi-period competition with switching costs,”Econometrica,
60(3), 651-666.
Besanko, D., U. Doraszelski, Y. Kryukov, and M. Satterthwaite (2010) “Learning-by-doing, orga-
nizational forgetting, and industry dynamics,” Econometrica, 78(2), 453-508.
Biglaiser, G. and J. Cr´ emer (2020) “The value of incumbency when platforms face heterogenous
consumers,” AEJ-Micro, forthcoming.
Biglaiser, G., E. Calvano, and J. Cr´ emer (2019) “Incumbency advantage and its value,”Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, 28(1), 41-48.
Cabral, L. M (2011) “Dynamic price competition with network eﬀects,” Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 78, 83-111.
Cabral, L. M. and M. H. Riordan (1994) “The learning curve, market dominance, and predatory
pricing,” Econometrica, 62(5), 1115.
Caillaud, B. and B. Jullien (2001) “Competing cybermediaries,” European Economic Review, 45(4-
6), 797-808.
Dasgupta, P. and J.Stiglitz (1988) “Learning-by-doing, market structure and industrial and trade
policies,” Oxford Economic Papers, 40(2), 246-268.
De Corniere, A. and G. Taylor (2020) “Data and Competition,” Working paper.
Farboodi, M., R. Mihet, T. Philippon, and L. Veldkamp (2019) “Big data and ﬁrm dynamics,”
AER Papers and Proceedings, 109, 38-42.
43

=== PAGE 44 / 44 ===

Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (1983) “Learning-by-doing and market performance,” Bell Journal of
Economics, 14(2) 522-530.
Halaburda, H. B. Jullien, and Y. Yehezkel (2020) “Dynamic competition with network externalities:
Why history matters,” RAND Journal of Economics, 51(1), 3-31.
Katz, M. L. and C. Shapiro (1986) “Technology adoption in the presence of network externalities,”
Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), 822-841.
Klemperer, P. (1987) “Markets with consumer switching costs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
102(2), 375-394.
Mitchell, M. and A. Skrzypacz (2006) “Network externalities and long-run market shares,” Eco-
nomic Theory, 29(3), 621-648.
Prufer, J. and C. Schottm¨ uller (2017) “Competing with big data,” Tilburg Law School Research
Paper.
Salant, D. (1990) “Some Stochastic Oligopoly Races for Experience,” Working paper.
Schaefer, M., G. Sapi and S. Lorincz (2018) “The eﬀect of big data on recommendation quality: The
example of internet search,” No 284. D¨ usseldorf Institute for Competition Economics Discussion
Papers.
44