

=== PAGE 1 / 57 ===

The Economics of Social Data∗
Dirk Bergemann† Alessandro Bonatti‡ Tan Gan§
September 30, 2022
Abstract
A data intermediary acquires signals from individual consumers regarding their
preferences. The intermediary resells the information in a product market wherein
ﬁrms and consumers tailor their choices to the demand data. The social dimension of
the individual data—whereby a consumer’s data are predictive of others’ behavior—
generates a data externality that can reduce the intermediary’s cost of acquiring the
information. The intermediary optimally preserves the privacy of consumers’ identities
if and only if doing so increases social surplus. This policy enables the intermediary to
capture the total value of the information as the number of consumers becomes large.
Keywords: social data; personal information; consumer privacy; privacy paradox;
data intermediaries; data externality; data policy; data rights; collaborative ﬁltering.
JEL Classification: D44, D82, D83.
∗Bergemann and Bonatti acknowledge ﬁnancial support through NSF Grant SES-1948692. Bergemann
and Gan acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Omidyar and Knight Foundation. We thank Joseph Abadi,
Daron Acemo˘ glu, Susan Athey, Steve Berry, Nima Haghpanah, Nicole Immorlica, Al Klevorick, Scott Komin-
ers, Annie Liang, Roger McNamee, Jeanine Mikl´ os-Thal, Enrico Moretti, Stephen Morris, Denis Nekipelov,
Asu ¨Ozda˘ glar, Fiona Scott-Morton, Shoshana Vasserman, Glen Weyl, and Kai-Hao Yang for helpful discus-
sions. We also thank Michelle Fang and Miho Hong for valuable research assistance and the audiences at
numerous seminars and conferences for their productive comments.
†Department of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, dirk.bergemann@yale.edu.
‡MIT Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, MA 02142, bonatti@mit.edu.
§Department of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, tan.gan@yale.edu.
1
arXiv:2004.03107v3  [cs.GT]  29 Sep 2022

=== PAGE 2 / 57 ===

1 Introduction
Individual and Social Data The rise of large digital platforms—such as Facebook,
Google, and Amazon in the US and JD, Tencent and Alibaba in China—has led to the
unprecedented collection and commercial use of individual data. The steadily increasing
user bases of these platforms generate massive amounts of data about individual consumers,
including their preferences, locations, friends, and political views. In turn, many of the ser-
vices provided by large Internet platforms rely critically on these data. The availability of
individual-level data permits reﬁned search results, personalized product recommendations,
informative ratings, timely traﬃc data, and targeted advertisements.
The recent disclosures on the use and misuse of social data by digital platforms have
prompted regulators to limit the largely unsupervised use of individual data by these com-
panies. As a result, nearly all proposed and enacted regulation to date aims to ensure that
consumers retain control over their data. However, the digital privacy paradox (e.g., Athey,
Catalini, and Tucker (2017)) indicates that even small monetary incentives may lead indi-
viduals to relinquish their private data. The low cost of acquiring private data–seemingly at
odds with consumers’ stated preferences over their privacy– drives the appetite of platforms
to gather information and may undermine the eﬃcacy of regulation. 1
This article suggests a uniﬁed explanation for the digital privacy paradox and the selective
use of data for price and product choices. A key observation is that individual data are
actually social data : data captured from an individual user are informative not only about
that user but also about other users with similar characteristics or behaviors. The social
dimension of the data generates a data externality, the sign and magnitude of which depend
on the structure of the data and on the use of the gained information.
Many digital platforms use social data to increase the value provided by their services.
Google search results, for example, are informed by the choices of previous users. Indeed,
the search engine is only successful because it mediates information among many consumers.
Likewise, Amazon uses data collected from other consumers to curate a “recommended for
you” list of products and explicitly suggests goods that are “frequently bought together.”
Finally, YouTube and Waze tailor their suggestions of videos and traﬃc directions to each
user’s preferences, as estimated by combining network data and individual data. However,
social data also facilitates surplus extraction, e.g., individual shopping data convey informa-
tion about the willingness to pay of consumers with similar purchase histories.
1The recent report by Furman, Coyle, Fletcher, McAules, and Marsden (2019) identiﬁes “the central
importance of data as a driver of concentration and a barrier to competition in digital markets”—a theme
echoed in the reports by Crem` er, de Montjoye, and Schweitzer (2019) and by the Stigler Committee on
Digital Platforms (2019).
2

=== PAGE 3 / 57 ===

We analyze three critical aspects of the economics of social data. First, we consider
how the collection and transmission of individual data change the terms of trade among
consumers, ﬁrms (e.g., advertisers), and data intermediaries (e.g., large Internet platforms
that sell targeted advertising space). Second, we examine how the social dimension of the
data magniﬁes the value of individual data for platforms and facilitates the acquisition of
large datasets. Third, we analyze how data intermediaries with market power manipulate the
trade-oﬀs induced by social data through the aggregation and the precision of the information
that they provide about consumers.
A Model of Data Intermediation We develop a framework to evaluate the ﬂow and
allocation of individual data in the presence of data externalities. Our model focuses on
three types of economic agents: consumers, ﬁrms, and data intermediaries. These agents
interact in two distinct but linked markets: a data market and a product market.
In the product market, each consumer (she) determines the quantity that she wishes to
purchase, and a single producer (he) sets the unit price at which he oﬀers a product to the
consumers. Initially, each consumer has private information about her willingness to pay for
the ﬁrm’s product. This information consists of a signal with two additive components: a
fundamental component and a noise component. The fundamental component represents
her willingness to pay, and the noise component reﬂects that her initial information might
be imperfect. Both components can be correlated across consumers: in practice, diﬀerent
consumers’ preferences can exhibit common traits, and consumers might undergo similar
experiences that induce correlation in their errors.
In the data market, a monopolist intermediary acquires demand information from the
individual consumers in exchange for a monetary payment. The intermediary then chooses
how much information to share with the other consumers and how much information to
sell to the producer. Sharing data with consumers allows them to tailor their demand to
their true preferences. Sharing data with the producer enables more tailored and possibly
personalized prices.
We introduce a rich model for the structure of individual data, which allows for correlation
in the fundamentals as well as in the noise terms across the individuals. We view this richness
in the data structure as the deﬁning element of data in digital platforms. In contrast, we
adopt a more speciﬁc model for product market interaction whereby a monopolist seller
charges linear prices for variable quantity. However, our main insights apply to any product
market where (a) data sharing teaches consumers about their preferences, and (b) a ﬁrm
seeks to extract the consumers’ surplus. 2
2In fact, the value of social data in Section 3 can be computed for alternative speciﬁcation of the product
3

=== PAGE 4 / 57 ===

The Value of Social Data Collecting data from multiple consumers helps any market
participant to ﬁlter the individual signals. This process can occur through two channels.
First, in a market where the noise terms are largely idiosyncratic, a large sample size ﬁlters
out errors and identiﬁes any common fundamentals. Second, in a market with largely id-
iosyncratic fundamentals, many observations ﬁlter out demand shocks and identify common
noise terms, thereby estimating individual fundamentals by diﬀerencing (Proposition 1).
However, the choice by each consumer to share her data with the intermediary is guided
only by her private beneﬁts and costs, not by the information gains she generates with her
actions. Thus, the intermediary must compensate each individual consumer only to the
extent that the disclosed information aﬀects her own welfare on the margin . Critically, the
platform does not have to compensate the individual consumer for any changes in her welfare
caused by the information deduced from other consumers’ signals.
Therefore, social data drive a wedge between the socially eﬃcient and proﬁtable uses
of information. First, the cost of acquiring individual data can be substantially less than
the value of the information to the platform. Second, although many uses of consumer
information exhibit positive externalities, very little prevents the platform from trading data
for proﬁtable uses that are in fact harmful to consumers (Proposition 2). 3
More generally, the data externality can induce too much or too little trade in data. In-
deed, the condition for data intermediation to yield positive proﬁts is qualitatively diﬀerent
from the condition for intermediation to yield social welfare gains. In particular, the inter-
mediary obtains positive proﬁts when a large number of consumers exhibit a strong degree of
correlation in their preferences: this allows the intermediary to acquire the consumers’ data
in exchange for minimal compensation. On the other hand, welfare improvements depend on
how much additional information each consumer can obtain about her own preferences from
the other consumers’ signals. Therefore, when many consumers have strongly correlated
preferences and very precise signals, data sharing is detrimental to welfare but proﬁtable to
the intermediary. Conversely, there are data structures (e.g., ones with independent funda-
mentals and strongly correlated error terms) for which data sharing is beneﬁcial to consumers
but unproﬁtable for the data intermediary.
market and a general result for anonymization is obtained in Section 4. Finally in Section 5, we consider
a richer environment where a merchant oﬀers diﬀerent varieties to consumers with heterogeneous tastes for
his products. In that case, the ﬁrm’s actions both generate value and attempt to capture it.
3Recent empirical work on the eﬀects of privacy regulation such as the European Union’s General Data
Protection Regulation (e.g., Aridor, Che, and Salz (2020) and Johnson, Shriver, and Goldberg (2020)),
indicates that data externalities are relevant for consumers’ and businesses’ decisions to share their data.
In the United States, legislators are also increasingly aware of the consequences of data externalities. In
particular, the US House Committee on the Judiciary (2020) reports that “[...] the social data gathered
through [a platform’s] services may exceed their economic value to consumers.”
4

=== PAGE 5 / 57 ===

Equilibrium Data-Sharing Policies A natural question is then whether the data market
imposes any limitations at all on equilibrium information sharing. To shed light on this
issue, we consider the choice of whether to reveal the consumers’ identities to the producer
or to collect anonymous data. When consumers are homogeneous ex ante, we show that
the intermediary collects anonymous data if and only if the transmission of identity data
reduces total surplus. Therefore, even if the data transmission may be socially detrimental,
the optimal choice of data anonymization is socially eﬃcient (Proposition 3).
In our model of linear price discrimination, collecting anonymous data amounts to selling
aggregate, market-level information to the producer. With this choice, the intermediary does
not enable the producer to set personalized prices: the data are transmitted but disconnected
from the users’ personal proﬁles. In other words, the role of social data provides a more
nuanced ability to determine the modality of information acquisition and use.
Under anonymized data intermediation, the gap between the social value of the data
and the price of the data widens when the number of consumers increases. In particular, as
the sources of data multiply, the contribution of each individual consumer to the aggregate
information shrinks, which drives down the individual payments to consumers, and possibly
the total payment as well (Proposition 5).
We develop a general anonymization result (Proposition 8) and extend the model in
several directions. We ﬁrst introduce consumer heterogeneity by considering multiple groups
of consumers. We ﬁnd that the intermediary aggregates the data at least to the level of the
coarsest partition of homogeneous consumers, although further aggregation is proﬁtable when
the number of consumers is small. The resulting group pricing—discriminatory pricing based
on observable characteristics, such as location—has welfare consequences between those of
complete privacy and those of price personalization (Proposition 9).
We then consider a model in which the producer can choose prices and product character-
istics to match an additional horizontal (taste) dimension of the consumers’ preferences. The
resulting data policy then aggregates the vertical dimension but not the horizontal dimen-
sion, thereby enabling the producer to oﬀer personalized product recommendations but not
personalized prices (Proposition 10). Finally, in the Online Appendix, we explore the data
intermediary’s ability to oﬀer privacy guarantees by collecting less than perfect information
about the consumers’ signals.
Implications and Applications There exist a wide variety of data intermediaries and
associated business models. The point of our article is not to try to match any speciﬁc
business model but rather to speak to the general principles that seem to be in eﬀect in many
markets. In particular, our model assumes that each consumer is compensated directly with
5

=== PAGE 6 / 57 ===

a monetary transfer for her individual data. There exist a few concrete examples of such
transactions (e.g., Nielsen oﬀers monetary rewards to consumers for access to their browsing
and purchasing data). However, most data intermediaries compensate their users via the
quality of the services they oﬀer, e.g., social networks, search, mail, video. These services
are nominally free, but in practice (through more or less transparent terms and conditions)
they are fueled by the data generated by their users.
Likewise, digital platforms occasionally transfer consumers’ data to merchants for a fee.
Much more often, however, they monetize their data by selling access to targeted advertising
campaigns—see the report by the?. This enables the merchants to reap the value of informa-
tion, by conditioning their messages and their prices on the consumers’ preferences, without
directly observing their data. These transactions amount to indirect sales of information, as
discussed in Bergemann and Bonatti (2019).
Our model’s predictions for the nature of the externality, for the equilibrium allocation
of data, and for its welfare properties then depend on how targeted advertising aﬀects to-
tal surplus in any given market. Speciﬁcally, if advertising generates value by matching of
buyers and sellers, as in Bergemann and Bonatti (2011), our model would predict the in-
termediation of individual-level information through very detailed targeting categories. If,
instead, targeted advertisements facilitate ineﬃcient price discrimination, the model would
predict coarser targeting categories that induce market-level or group-level pricing.
Related Literature This article contributes to the growing literature on data markets
recently surveyed in Bergemann and Bonatti (2019). In particular, the role of data external-
ities in the socially excessive diﬀusion of personal data has been a central concern in Choi,
Jeon, and Kim (2019) and ?, both considering a model with many buyers and one ﬁrm that
acts as an integrated data intermediary and seller.
Choi, Jeon, and Kim (2019) introduce information externalities into a model of monopoly
pricing with unit demand. Each consumer is described by two independent random variables:
her willingness to pay for the monopolist’s service and her sensitivity to a loss of privacy.
The purchase of the service by the consumer requires the transmission of personal data.
From the collected data, the seller gains additional revenue, depending on the proportion of
units sold and the volume of data collected. The total nuisance cost paid by each consumer
depends on the total number of consumers sharing their personal data. Thus, the optimal
pricing policy of the monopolist yields excessive loss of privacy, relative to the social welfare
maximizing policy.
? also analyze data acquisition in the presence of information externalities. As in Choi,
Jeon, and Kim (2019), they consider a model with many consumers and a single data-
6

=== PAGE 7 / 57 ===

acquiring ﬁrm. Like the current analysis, ? propose an explicit statistical model for their
data; the model allows the authors to assess the loss of privacy for the consumer and the
gains in prediction accuracy for the ﬁrm. Their analysis then pursues a diﬀerent, and largely
complementary, direction from ours. In particular, they analyze how consumers with het-
erogeneous privacy concerns trade information with a data platform and derive conditions
under which the equilibrium allocation of information is (in)eﬃcient.
In contrast to these two important contributions, we explicitly introduce a data interme-
diary with objectives distinct from either the consumers or the seller. We consider rich data
structures for fundamentals and noise terms that capture the wide range of social data on
digital platforms. This allows us to endogenize privacy concerns and to quantify the down-
stream welfare impact of data intermediation. In addition, we can investigate when and how
privacy can be partially or fully preserved through aggregation, anonymization, and noise.
Thus, we augment the analysis in the above contributions with additional insights regarding
data ﬂows and data intermediation. In particular, we show that the data externality can
have a positive or a negative impact on consumer and social surplus depending on the data
structure. In consequence, a monopolist intermediary can induce either too little or too
much information sharing in equilibrium.
Acquisti, Taylor, and Wagman (2016) survey the literature on the economics of privacy
in great detail. An early and inﬂuential article is Taylor (2004), who analyzes the sales of
consumer purchase histories without data externalities. More recently, Cummings, Ligett,
Pai, and Roth (2016) investigate how privacy policies aﬀect user and advertiser behavior in
a simple model of targeted advertising. The low level of compensation that users command
for their personal data is discussed in Arrieta-Ibarra, Goﬀ, Jimenez-Hernandez, Lanier, and
Weyl (2018), who propose sources of countervailing market power, and in a growing body of
empirical work. In particular, Tang (2019) uses large-scale ﬁeld experiments to estimate the
value that online borrowers assign to several pieces of personal data. Lin (2019) separates
intrinsic and instrumental preferences for privacy through a lab experiment that also uncovers
data externalities.
Fainmesser, Galeotti, and Momot (2020) provide a digital privacy model in which data
collection improves the service provided to consumers. However, as the collected data can
also leak to third parties and thus impose privacy costs, an optimal digital privacy policy
must be established. Similarly, Jullien, Lefouili, and Riordan (2020) analyze the equilibrium
privacy policy of websites that monetize information collected from users by charging third
parties for targeted access. Gradwohl (2017) considers a network game in which the level
of beneﬁcial information sharing among the players is limited by the possibility of leakage
and a decrease in informational interdependence. Ali, Lewis, and Vasserman (2019) study
7

=== PAGE 8 / 57 ===

a model of personalized pricing with disclosure by an informed consumer, and they analyze
how diﬀerent disclosure policies aﬀect consumer surplus. Ichihashi (2020b) studies both
personalized pricing and product recommendations, and shows that a seller beneﬁts from
committing not to use the consumer’s information to set prices. Our result on optimal
anonymization and market-level pricing has similar implications, but is entirely driven by
the data externality that appears when multiple consumers are present.
Finally, Liang and Madsen (2020) investigate how data policies can provide incentives in
principal-agent relationships. They emphasize the structure of individual data and how the
substitutes or complements nature of individual signals determines the impact of data on
incentives. Ichihashi (2020a) considers a single data intermediary and asks how complements
or substitutes consumer signals aﬀect the equilibrium price of the individual data.
2 Model
We consider an idealized trading environment with many consumers, a single intermediary
in the data market, and a single producer in the product market.
2.1 Product Market
There are ﬁnitely many consumers, labeled i = 1,...,N . In the product market, each con-
sumer (she) chooses a quantity level qi to maximize her net utility given a unit price pi
oﬀered by the producer (he):
ui(wi,qi,pi) ≜ wiqi −piqi −1
2q2
i.
Each consumer i has a baseline willingness to pay for the product wi ∈R.
The producer sets the unit price pi at which he oﬀers his product to each consumer i.
The producer has a linear production cost
c(q) ≜ c·q, for some c≥0.
The producer’s proﬁts are given by
π(pi,qi) ≜
∑
i
(pi −c) qi.
8

=== PAGE 9 / 57 ===

2.2 Data Environment
The vector of willingness to pay, w = (...,wi,...) ∈RN, is distributed according to a joint
distribution Fw:
w∼Fw. (1)
Initially, each consumer may have only imperfect information about her willingness to pay.
In particular, consumer i observes a signal
si ≜ wi + σ·ei, (2)
where σ > 0 and ei is consumer i’s error term. The error terms e = ( ...,ei,...) ∈ RN
are independent of the willingness to pay w, and they are distributed according to a joint
distribution Fe:
e∼Fe. (3)
We denote by S the information structure generated by the complete vector of consumer
signals s = ( ...,si,...) ∈RN. We allow for arbitrary distributions of fundamentals w and
errors e, and hence arbitrary correlation structures across consumers, under the restriction
that the (Fw,Fe) are symmetric across individuals. We view the richness in the data structure
as represented by (1) and (3) as the deﬁning feature of social data in the digital economy. In
particular, the noise in the signal si of each individual given by (2) reﬂects the importance
of social learning as enabled by recommenders, rating and search engines.
Without loss of generality we assume that (i) each individual willingness to pay wi has
mean µand variance 1; (ii) individual errors ei have mean 0 and variance 1 (which is scaled
by the parameter σ).
The producer knows the structure of demand and thus the common prior distribution
of consumers’ willingness to pay. However, absent any additional information, the producer
does not know the realized willingness to pay wi of any consumer (nor her signal si) prior
to setting prices. This data environment has two important features. First, any demand
information beyond the common prior comes from the signals of the individual consumers.
Second, with any amount of noise in the signals (i.e., if σ >0), each consumer can learn
more about her own demand from the signals of the other consumers.
The following leading examples illustrate two ways in which data sharing can help each
consumer learn more about her individual willingness to pay. In, Example 1 a new product
has a common value that consumers are imperfectly informed about.
Example 1 (Common Preferences)
Fundamentals wi are perfectly correlated and errors ei are independent: si = w+ σ·ei.
9

=== PAGE 10 / 57 ===

In this case, data sharing helps to ﬁlter out the idiosyncratic error terms: as N becomes
large, the average signal across all consumers identiﬁes the common willingness to pay.
In Example 2, individual consumers have independent values for a new therapy but are
exposed to a common health shock.
Example 2 (Common Experience)
Errors ei are perfectly correlated, and fundamentals wi are independent: si = wi + σ·e.
Under this structure, the average signal identiﬁes the common error component e as
N becomes large. All market participants can then precisely estimate each wi from the
diﬀerence between individual and average signal.
As we shall see, information sharing enables learning in both examples. However, the
actions of consumers −iimpact the surplus of consumer iquite diﬀerently in the two cases,
which has implications for the equilibrium price of data. More generally, the data structure
will determine how to separate the individual and the aggregate information.
2.3 Data Market
The data market is run by a single data intermediary (it). As a monopolist market maker, the
data intermediary decides how to collect the available information ( si) from each consumer
and how to share it with the other consumers and the producer. Thus, the data intermediary
faces both an information design problem and an information pricing problem.
We consider bilateral contracts between the individual consumers and the intermediary
and between the producer and the intermediary. The data intermediary oﬀers these bilateral
contracts ex ante, i.e., before the realization of any demand shocks. Each bilateral contract
deﬁnes a data policy and a data price.
The data contract with consumerispeciﬁes a data inﬂow policy Xi and a fee mi ∈R paid
to the consumer. The data inﬂow policy describes how each signal si enters the database
of the intermediary. We restrict attention to the following two policies: (i) the complete
(identity-revealing) data policy X = S, where the intermediary collects each consumer’s
signal si; and (ii) the anonymized data policy X = A, where the intermediary collects
individual signals without identifying information. We model the anonymized data policy as
A: S →δ(S) ,
for a random permutation of the consumers’ indices i→δ(i). In both cases, as discussed in
Section 2.4 below, there are no further incentive constraints, i.e., consumers transmit their
information truthfully.
10

=== PAGE 11 / 57 ===

In our product market model, where the consumer’s demand is linear in her signal, the
anonymized data policy Ais equivalent to an aggregate data policy that conveys information
about the average willingness to pay. Intuitively, the anonymized data policy prevents the
producer from matching signals to consumers, i.e., from proﬁtably charging personalized
prices. In Section 7, we enrich the intermediary’s strategy space by allowing for data policies
that collect partial information about the consumers’ signals.
A data contract with the producer speciﬁes a data outﬂow policy Y and a fee m0 ∈R
paid by the producer. The data outﬂow policy determines how each consumer’s collected
signal is transmitted to the producer and to other consumers. In particular, letting X denote
the intermediary’s realized data inﬂow, a data outﬂow policy Y = (Y0,Y1,...Y N) describes
how the collected data are released to the seller,
Y0 : X →∆(RN),
and to each consumer,
Yi : X →∆(RN).
Sharing data with other consumers is a critical design element because doing so allows each
consumer to adjust her quantity demanded at any price. Therefore, the information received
by consumers also impacts the producer’s willingness to pay for the intermediary’s data.
The data intermediary maximizes the net revenue
R≜ m0 −
∑N
i=1
mi. (4)
2.4 Equilibrium and Timing
The game proceeds sequentially. First, the terms of trade on the data market and then the
terms of trade on the product market are established. The timing of the game is as follows:
1. The data intermediary oﬀers a data inﬂow policy ( mi,Xi) to each consumer i. Con-
sumers simultaneously accept or reject the intermediary’s oﬀer.
2. The data intermediary oﬀers a data outﬂow policy ( m0,Y ) to the producer, based on
the (known) number of consumers who have accepted. The producer accepts or rejects
the oﬀer.
3. Consumers’ signals s are realized, and the information ﬂows ( x,y) are transmitted
according to the terms of the data policies.
11

=== PAGE 12 / 57 ===

4. The producer sets a unit price pi for each consumer i who makes a purchase decision
qi, given her available information about wi.
We analyze the Perfect Bayesian Equilibria of the game. Under the timing described
above, information is imperfect but symmetric at the contracting stage. Furthermore, when
the consumer receives the intermediary’s oﬀer, she must anticipate the intermediary’s choice
of data outﬂow policy, which determines what data are shared with her, as well as with
the producer. We denote by a0,ai ∈{0,1}the participation decisions by the producer and
by consumer i, respectively. A Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium is then a tuple of inﬂow and
outﬂow data policies, data and product pricing policies, and participation decisions:
{(X∗,Y ∗,m∗) ; p∗,q∗; a∗},
where
a∗
0 : X×Y ×R →{0,1}, a∗
i : Xi ×R →{0,1},
such that (i) the producer maximizes his expected proﬁts, (ii) the intermediary maximizes its
expected revenue, and (iii) each consumer maximizes her net utility. In our baseline analysis,
we focus on the best equilibrium for the data intermediary; in the best equilibrium, every
consumer accepts the oﬀer from the data intermediary. We discuss a unique implementation
in Section 4.3.
Figure 2.4 summarizes the information and value ﬂow in the data and product markets.
Figure 1: Data and Value Flows
Discussion of Model Features
Participation Constraints The participation constraints of every consumer and of the
producer are required to hold at the ex ante level. Thus, the consumers agree to the data
12

=== PAGE 13 / 57 ===

policy before the realization of their signals. The choice of ex ante participation constraints
captures the prevailing conditions under which users interact with large digital platforms.
For instance, users of services on Amazon, Facebook, or Google typically establish an account
and accept the “terms of service” before making any speciﬁc query or post. Through the lens
of our model, the consumer requires a level of compensation that allows her to proﬁtably
share the information in expectation. Upon agreeing to participate, there are no further
incentive compatibility constraints on the transmission of her information.
Lack of Commitment As we mentioned above, targeted advertising is the primary
source of revenue for digital platforms. Consequently, the data intermediary in our sequential
game sells the consumers’ data only to the producer, and cannot commit to withholding any
information from him. Similarly, the intermediary’s choice of data outﬂow policy occurs
after consumers are enlisted but before their data are realized. This assumption captures
the limited ability of a platform to write advertising contracts contingent on, say, the volume
of activity taking place at any point in time.
Linear Price Discrimination The producer in our baseline model uses the consumers’
data to charge a unit price to each consumer. Whether richer pricing instruments enable
online merchants to implement more sophisticated forms of price discrimination is largely
an empirical question. However, as we discuss in Section 5.1, the general anonymization
result of Proposition 8 guides the intermediary’s optimal data policy even if the producer
can extract more of the surplus generated through better information. Indeed, even in the
case of perfect price discrimination, the presence of the data externality would continue to
drive a gap between equilibrium and socially eﬃcient allocation.
3 Value of Social Data
3.1 Data Sharing and Product Market
In our extensive form game, given the realized data inﬂow, the intermediary oﬀers a data
outﬂow policy to the producer. This policy speciﬁes both the fee m0 and the ﬂow of infor-
mation to all market participants, including the consumers. The data outﬂow policy thus
determines both how well informed the producer is and how well informed his customers are.
Because the information is being sold to the producer, the intermediary will choose a
data outﬂow policy that maximizes the producer’s proﬁts, and then extracts the value of
this information through the fee m0. The intermediary’s choice of outﬂow policy is simpliﬁed
considerably by the following result, which allows us to restrict attention to policies in which
every consumer is weakly better informed than the producer.
13

=== PAGE 14 / 57 ===

Lemma 1 (Data Outﬂow Policy)
For any data inﬂow X, it is without loss of generality to consider data outﬂow policies where
Y0(X) is measurable with respect to each Yi(X).
Interestingly, the result of Lemma 1 does not rely on the speciﬁc nature of the product
market interaction. The key observation is that, if the producer were better informed, the
prices charged would convey information to consumers about their own willingness to pay.
The ensuing signaling incentives impose a cost on the producer because he will need to
deviate from the prices that maximize his proﬁts, holding ﬁxed the consumers’ beliefs. The
intermediary can then increase the producer’s proﬁts (weakly) by revealing any information
contained in the equilibrium prices directly to the consumers. Furthermore, this improvement
is strict if, when the consumers receive this additional information, the producer modiﬁes
his choice of price.
Under the data outﬂow policies of Lemma 1, we can easily quantify the value of infor-
mation for consumers and producers. The shared data help each consumer estimate her
own willingness to pay. For the producer, the shared data enable a more informed pricing
policy. In particular, given the realized data outﬂow y ∈Y, the optimal pricing policy for
the producer consists of a vector of (potentially personalized) prices p∗
i, thus resulting in a
vector of individual quantities q∗
i purchased. We denote the predicted value of consumer i’s
willingness to pay, given the signals ( si,yi) by:
ˆwi(si,yi) ≜ E[wi |si,yi] .
The realized demand of consumer i is given by
qi(si,yi,p) = ˆwi(si,yi) −p.
As Y0 is (weakly) less informative than Yi, the producer chooses the optimal price
p∗
i (y0) = E[ ˆwi(si,yi) |Y0] + c
2 = ˆwi(y0) + c
2 ,
which results in the equilibrium quantity:
q∗
i (si,yi,y0) ≜ qi(si,yi,p∗
i (y0)) .
The ex ante expected proﬁt of the producer from interacting with consumer iis given by
Πi((Si,Yi) ,Y0) ≜ E[π(p∗
i (y0) ,q∗
i (si,yi,y0)) |Y0 ] = 1
4E
[
( ˆwi(y0) −c)2 |Y0
]
.
14

=== PAGE 15 / 57 ===

The ﬁrst argument in Π i(·,·) refers to consumer i’s information structure ( Si,Yi) and the
second argument refers to the producer’s information structure Y0. Similarly, we denote the
indirect utility of consumer i as
Ui((Si,Yi) ,Y0) ≜ E[ui(wi,q∗
i (si,yi,y0) ,p∗
i (y0)) |Si,Yi] = 1
2E
[
( ˆwi(si,yi) −p∗
i (y0))2 |Si,Yi
]
.
3.2 Welfare Eﬀects of Data Sharing
The model with quadratic payoﬀs (regardless of the prior distribution of consumers’ will-
ingness to pay) yields explicit expressions for the value of information for product market
participants. In particular, because prices and quantities are linear functions of the posterior
mean ˆwi, the ex ante average prices and quantities E[p∗] and E[q∗] are constant across all
information structures. Consequently, all surplus levels depend only on the ex ante variance
of the posterior mean ˆwi under the consumers’ and the merchant’s information structures.
We therefore quantity the players’ information gains under any information structure Y
through the variance of posterior expectation:
G(Y) ≜ var[ˆwi(y)], (5)
and refer to it as the (informational) gain function . As we normalized the variance of the
fundamental wi to 1, the gain function G(Y) represents the fraction of the variance of wi
explained by the signal y.
We now turn to the consequences of data sharing relative to no information sharing.
Without information, the producer charges a constant price for all consumers based on the
prior mean, denoted by ¯p. In contrast, the consumer already has an initial signal si, accord-
ing to which she can adjust her quantity. The producer’s net revenue and the consumer’s
expected utility under no information sharing are then given by
Πi(Si,∅) ≜ E[π(¯p,q∗
i (si))] ,
Ui(Si,∅) ≜ E[ui(wi,q∗
i (si) ,¯p) |Si] .
We can now express the value of data sharing for the consumers and the producer in
terms of the respective information gains.
Proposition 1 (Value of Data Outﬂow)
15

=== PAGE 16 / 57 ===

1. The value of data outﬂow Y for the producer is
Πi((Si,Yi) ,Y0) −Πi(Si,∅) = 1
4G(Y0) . (6)
2. The value of data outﬂow Y for consumer i is
Ui((Si,Yi) ,Y0) −Ui(Si,∅) = 1
2 (G(Si,Yi) −G(Si)) −3
8G(Y0) . (7)
3. The social value of data outﬂow Y is
Wi((Si,Yi) ,Y0) −Wi(Si,∅) = 1
2 (G(Si,Yi) −G(Si)) −1
8G(Y0) . (8)
Thus, consumer and social surplus increase with the additional information learned by
the consumers G(Si,Yi)−G(Si), and decrease with the information learned by the producer
G(Y0). Intuitively, the welfare consequences of data sharing operate through two channels.
First, with more information about her own preferences, the demand of each consumer is
more responsive to her willingness to pay; this responsiveness is beneﬁcial for consumers
and (weakly) for the producer. Second, with access to better data, the producer adapts
his pricing policy to the estimate of each consumer’s willingness to pay ˆwi. This price
responsiveness dampens some of the quantity responsiveness. Hence, this second channel
reduces both consumer surplus and total welfare.
Whether the ﬁrst or the second channel dominates depends on the informativeness of the
consumers’ initial signals G(Si), and on the degree of correlation in the fundamental and
error terms, which jointly determine any consumer’s ability to learn from others’ information.
Corollary 1 formalizes this intuition by deriving the implications of Proposition 1 in several
special cases.
Corollary 1 (Welfare Eﬀects)
1. If consumers cannot learn from each other’s signals (G(S) = G(Si)), any data sharing
reduces consumer and social surplus.
2. If individual signals si are uninformative (G(Si) = 0) ,any data sharing improves con-
sumer and social surplus.
3. Social surplus is maximized by collecting and sharing all signals with every consumer
(Yi = S), and sharing no data with the producer (Y0 = ∅).
16

=== PAGE 17 / 57 ===

Data sharing is detrimental to consumer and social surplus when consumers observe
their willingness to pay perfectly ( σ= 0), or when both fundamentals ( wi,wj) and errors
(ei,ej) are independent. In those cases, any data sharing only enables price discrimination. 4
Conversely, if individual signals become arbitrarily uninformative, but the entire vector s
remains informative, then evensymmetric information gains (i.e., data outﬂow policies where
Y0 = Yi) yield Pareto improvements in the product market. In this case, the producer and the
consumer share the additional gains from trade associated with better informed consumption
and pricing decisions.
Finally, an immediate implication of the two channels highlighted by Proposition 1 is that
the ﬁrst best allocation of information consists of collecting and sharing all data among the
consumers and none with the producer. However, a data intermediary with market power
will not implement the socially optimal allocation of information. In particular, because the
producer is paying for the data, he will always receive some information. To fully describe
the outcome of the game, we then turn to the price of social data.
3.3 Price of Social Data
We ﬁrst derive the total paymentm0 charged to the producer and the compensation mi owed
to each consumer. For the producer, the gains from data acquisition have to at least oﬀset
the price of the data. At the same time, the intermediary can charge up to the entire value
of the information outﬂow Y0 to the producer. From expression (6) in Proposition 1, we can
then write the payment m0 as
m0 (Y) = N(Πi((Si,Yi) ,Y0) −Πi(Si,∅)) = N
4 G(Y0) . (9)
Not surprisingly, the intermediary’s proﬁts are increasing in the amount of information sold
to the producer. However, we also know from Lemma 1 that every consumer i receives at
least as much information as the producer. These two observations establish the optimality
of the complete data outﬂow policy. Under this policy, the entire realized data inﬂow X
is reported to the producer and to all consumers, including those who did not accept the
intermediary’s oﬀer.
4The special case in which each consumer knows her willingness to pay (i.e., signals are noiseless in our
model’s language) is closely related to the model of third-degree price discrimination in Robinson (1933) and
Schmalensee (1981). In our setting, data sharing enables the producer to oﬀer personalized prices; thus, price
discrimination occurs across diﬀerent realizations of the willingness to pay. In contrast, in Robinson (1933)
and Schmalensee (1981), price discrimination occurs across diﬀerent market segments. In both settings, the
central result is that average demand does not change (with all markets served), but social welfare is lower
under ﬁner market segmentation.
17

=== PAGE 18 / 57 ===

Lemma 2 (Optimal Data Outﬂow)
Given any realized data inﬂow X, the complete data outﬂow policy, Y∗
0 (X) = Y∗
i (X) = X
for all i, maximizes the gross revenue of the producer among all feasible data-outﬂow policies.
A critical driver of the consumer’s decision to share data is her ability to anticipate the
intermediary’s use of the information thus gained. By Lemma 2, every consumer knows that
all product market participants will receive the same information from the intermediary.
In particular, consumer i knows that, by rejecting her contract, she prevents the producer
from accessing her data Xi, but she does not forego the opportunity to learn from other
consumers’ data X−i. In other words, consumer i can learn X−i for free. In practice, this
corresponds to searching for the same content on a digital platform without “logging in” or
else agreeing to sharing her own data.
For any data inﬂow policy X and any underlying signal structure, the data intermediary
oﬀers positive payments to consumers. This occurs because the intermediary must compen-
sate consumers on the margin : consumer i requires compensation for revealing her data Xi
to the producer, given that the other N−1 consumers already share theirs. 5 Therefore, the
payments satisfy
mi ≥Ui((Si,X−i) ,X−i) −Ui((Si,X) ,X) . (10)
Intuitively, consumer i is not compensated for the (positive or negative) eﬀect of other
consumers’ data inﬂow X−i on her surplus. To see this more formally, suppose consumer i’s
participation constraint (10) binds, and rewrite compensation mi as
m∗
i (X) = Ui((Si,X−i) ,X−i) −Ui((Si,X) ,X)
= −(Ui((Si,X) ,X) −Ui(Si,∅))  
≜∆Ui(X)
+ Ui((Si,X−i) ,X−i) −Ui(Si,∅)  
≜DEi(X)
. (11)
The ﬁrst term in (11), denoted by ∆ Ui(X), is the total impact on consumer i’s surplus
associated with data inﬂow X. The second term is the data externality (12) imposed on i
by consumers j ̸= i. It reﬂects the change in utility when j ̸= i sell their data Xj to the
intermediary who then shares the data with the producer. As it is central to our analysis,
we now examine the latter term in detail.
3.4 Data Externality and Intermediation
Our notion of data externality isolates the eﬀect on consumer i’s surplus of the decision by
the other consumers to share their data with all market participants.
5We will revisit this property when we discuss the intermediary’s commitment power in Section 5.4.
18

=== PAGE 19 / 57 ===

Deﬁnition 1 (Data Externality)
The data externality imposed by consumers −i on consumer i is given by
DEi(X) ≜ Ui((Si,X−i) ,X−i) −Ui(Si,∅) . (12)
Using expression (7) in Proposition 1, the data externality can be written as
DEi(X) = 1
2 (G(Si,X−i) −G(Si)) −3
8G(X−i) . (13)
To provide some intuition as to what determines the sign of the data externality, we evaluate
expression (13) under the two special information structures in Examples 1 and 2. In both
cases, we consider what would happen if consumer i held back her signal, given that the
remaining N −1 consumers share theirs with the producer and with consumer i.
Example 1 illustrates that if consumer idoes not learn much from the signals of the other
consumers, but those signals help predict wi, then the data externality is negative.
Example 1 (Common Preferences)
Let si = w+σei, and suppose the intermediary collects all consumer data, Xi = Si. The pro-
ducer can use N−1 signals to estimate the common preference parameterw, i.e., G(S−i) >0.
If the individual signals are suﬃciently precise so that G(S) ≈G(Si), then consumer i is
worse oﬀ when other consumers share their signals, i.e., the data externality is negative.
Example 2 illustrates that if the producer cannot learn anything about wi from signals
s−i, then the data externality is unambiguously positive.
Example 2 (Common Experience)
Let si = wi+ σe, and suppose the intermediary collects all consumer data, Xi = Si. Because
all wi are independent, G(S−i) = 0, i.e., the producer cannot learn about wi from signals s−i
only. However, consumer i can use signals s−i to ﬁlter out the common error in her own
signal si, i.e., G(S) >G (Si). Therefore, other consumers’ signals help consumer i, i.e., the
data externality is positive.
Thus, the overall eﬀect of data sharing on consumer surplus (Proposition 1) depends
largely on the informativeness of individual signals si. Conversely, the impact of other
consumers’ sharing decisions varies signiﬁcantly with the data structure, particularly the
ability of the producer to learn about wi from signals s−i.
19

=== PAGE 20 / 57 ===

4 Optimal Data Intermediation
The data externality has direct implications for the intermediary’s proﬁt (4). Combining the
expressions for payments in (9) and (11), we can write the intermediary’s proﬁt R as
R(X) =
∑N
i=1
(∆Wi(X) −DEi(X)) , (14)
where ∆W(X) denotes the eﬀect of sharing data policy X on total surplus, as in (8). The
intermediary’s proﬁts are equal to the eﬀect of data sharing on social surplus, net of the
data externalities across all consumers. The sign of the data externality is therefore critical
for the proﬁtability of data intermediation. In particular, if consumers impose negative
data externalities on each other, this imposition directly reduces the compensation owed to
each one, and conversely if the data externalities are positive. The revenue formula (14)
clariﬁes how the intermediary’s objective diﬀers from the social planner’s. In particular, if
the data externality is negative, then intermediation can be proﬁtable but welfare reducing.
Conversely, if the data externality is positive, welfare-enhancing intermediation might not
be proﬁtable.
Having characterized the two terms ∆ Ui and DEi in (7) and (13), we can rewrite the
payments to consumers in (11) as
m∗
i (X) = 3
8 (G(X) −G(X−i)) . (15)
Finally, combining the terms m∗
0 (X) in (9) and m∗
i (X) in (15), we obtain
R(X) = N
8 (3G(X−i) −G(X)) . (16)
This yields a necessary and suﬃcient condition for proﬁtable data intermediation.
Proposition 2 (Proﬁtable Data Intermediation)
Data intermediation with inﬂow policy X is proﬁtable if and only if
3G(X−i) ≥G(X).
Proposition 2 considers the amount of information learned by the producer. Speciﬁcally,
it requires that the signals x−i generate at least 1 /3 of the variance of wi explained by the
entire vector xin order for the data inﬂow policy X to be proﬁtable. Intuitively, it is cheaper
to acquire each signal xi if the other consumers’ signals are substitutes, and this is more
likely to occur when the underlying fundamentals wi and w−i are correlated. Conversely, for
20

=== PAGE 21 / 57 ===

independent fundamentals, G(X−i) = 0 for any X, and intermediation is not proﬁtable.
We now draw the implications for the intermediary’s proﬁts in our two leading examples.
Corollary 2 (Common Preference)
Suppose fundamentals wi are perfectly correlated and errors ei are independent. When N is
large, data intermediation is always proﬁtable. However, for suﬃciently small σ, the data
externality is negative, and data sharing reduces social surplus.
These results echo the ﬁndings of ?, who considered signals with diminishing marginal
informativeness, and found socially excessive data intermediation. The information struc-
ture in Corollary 2 satisﬁes this submodularity property. In our model, however, socially
insuﬃcient intermediation can also occur. In particular, the intermediary may be unable
to generate positive proﬁts from socially eﬃcient information with complementary signals,
such as those in Corollary 3.
Corollary 3 (Common Experience)
Suppose fundamentals wi are independent and errors ei are perfectly correlated. For suﬃ-
ciently large σ, data sharing increases social surplus. However, because the fundamentals are
independent, data intermediation is never proﬁtable.
The conclusions of Corollaries 2 and 3 do not depend on whether the intermediary collects
complete data or anonymized data. However, as we discuss in the next section, it is always
optimal for the intermediary to anonymize the data collected.
4.1 Data Anonymization
We now explore the intermediary’s decision to anonymize the individual consumers’ demand
data. We focus on two maximally diﬀerent policies along this dimension. At one extreme,
the intermediary can collect and transmitcomplete (identity-revealing) data about individual
consumers ( X = S), thereby enabling the producer to charge personalized prices. At the
other extreme, the intermediary can collect anonymized data (X = A).
Under anonymized information intermediation, the producer charges the same price to all
consumers who participate in the intermediary’s data policy. In other words, from the point
of view of the producer, anonymized data is equivalent to aggregate demand data. These data
still allow the producer to perform third-degree price discrimination across realizations of
the total market demand but limit his ability to extract surplus from individual consumers.6
6More formally, under the anonymized data policy A, the producer has access to the vector δ(s), i.e., to a
uniformly random permutation of the consumers’ signals. Because the producer faces a prediction problem
for each wi with a convex loss, he chooses to charge a uniform price that is optimal for the sample average
of the consumers’ signals.
21

=== PAGE 22 / 57 ===

Certainly, for the producer, the value of market demand data is lower than the value
of individual demand data. However, the cost of acquiring such ﬁne-grained data from
consumers is also correspondingly higher. We now show that anonymizing the consumers’
information proﬁtably reduces the intermediary’s data acquisition costs.
Proposition 3 (Optimality of Data Anonymization)
The intermediary obtains strictly greater proﬁts by collecting anonymized consumer data.
Within the conﬁnes of our policies, but independent of the distributions of fundamental
and noise terms, the data intermediary ﬁnds it advantageous to not elicit the identity of
the consumer. Therefore, the producer will not oﬀer personalized prices but variable prices
that adjust to the realized information about market demand. In other words, a monopolist
intermediary might cause socially ineﬃcient information transmission, but the equilibrium
contractual outcome preserves privacy over the personal identity of the consumer.
In Section 5, we explore the boundaries of the anonymization result, under both het-
erogeneous consumers and alternative product-market speciﬁcations. In particular, we will
generalize our result to show that anonymization is optimal when consumers are homo-
geneous ex ante and transmitting data to the producer is socially ineﬃcient. Therefore,
if information is used to target advertisements, and more precise messages increase social
surplus, then we shall predict that the intermediary shares complete data. 7
For the case of surplus extraction (prices), the ﬁnding in Proposition 3 suggests why we
might see personalized prices in fewer settings than initially anticipated. In the context of
direct sales of information, for example, Nielsen does not sell individual households’ data to
merchants. Instead, Nielsen aggregates its panel data at the local market level. Similarly, in
the context of indirect sales of information, merchants on the retail platform Amazon very
rarely engage in personalized pricing. However, the price of every single good or service is
subject to substantial variation across both geographic markets and over time.
In light of the above result, we might interpret the restraint on the use of personal-
ized pricing as the optimal resolution of the intermediary’s trade-oﬀ in acquiring sensitive
consumer information. Stretching the interpretation, the pushback against Amazon’s intro-
duction of personalized pricing in the early 2000s can also be viewed as a tightening the
consumers’ participation constraints. Under any degree of competition, the net value of the
Amazon platform under perfect personalized pricing would not have exceeded the consumers’
outside options.
The data externality is, once again, the key to gaining intuition for why the intermediary
chooses data anonymization. Suppose consumers −i reveal their signals, and consumer
7If, in addition, responsiveness to ads is heterogeneous in the consumer population, coarser information
transmission (i.e., not fully anonymous) can also be optimal, as we show in Proposition 9.
22

=== PAGE 23 / 57 ===

i does not. With access to identifying information, the producer optimally aggregates the
available data to form the best predictor of the missing data point. In this case, the producer
charges a personalized price p∗
i (X−i) to each nonparticipating consumer i. With anonymous
data, the producer charges two prices: a single price for all participating consumers and
another price for the deviating, nonparticipating consumers. Because the distribution of
consumer willingness to pay and signals is symmetric, however, the producer’s inference on
wi is invariant to permutations of the other consumers’ signals, i.e.,
E[wi |a−i] = E[wi |s−i] .
Therefore, a nonparticipating consumer faces identical prices under both data policies: 8
p∗
i (S−i) = p∗
i (A−i) .
Likewise, consumer i’s posterior distribution over her ownwi does not depend on the identity
the other consumers. Therefore, removing identity information through the anonymized
policy X = A does not have any implications for consumers’ learning either:
E[wi |si,a−i] = E[wi |s] .
Because the amount of information available to consumer i and to the producer oﬀ the
path of play is independent of X ∈{A,S}, it follows that
Ui((Si,S−i) ,S−i) = Ui((Si,A−i) ,A−i) .
In turn, this implies DEi(S) = DEi(A). Thus, the data externality term DEi(X) in the
intermediary’s proﬁts (14) is not impacted by the choice of inﬂow X ∈{A,S}.
Along the path of play, however, the two data inﬂow policies yield diﬀerent outcomes. In
particular, the anonymized data inﬂow policy reduces the amount of information conveyed
to the producer in equilibrium. Crucially, this reduction does not occur at the expense of the
consumers’ own learning. Therefore, the shift to anonymized data increases the total surplus
terms ∆Wi(X) and the intermediary’s proﬁts. Put diﬀerently, anonymization reduces the
cost of procuring the information, relative to the loss in revenue.
We now show that data anonymization is the key to the “explosive” proﬁtability of
8Anonymization remains optimal if we force the producer to charge a single price to all consumers on
and oﬀ the equilibrium. With this interpretation, we intend to capture the idea that the producer oﬀers
one price “on the platform” to the participating consumers while interacting with the deviating consumer
“oﬄine.” The producer then uses the available market data to tailor the oﬄine price.
23

=== PAGE 24 / 57 ===

data intermediation when the number of consumers becomes large. We then revisit the
applications and limitations of our anonymization result in Section 5.
4.2 Large Markets
Thus far, we have considered the optimal data policy for a given ﬁnite number of consumers,
each of whom transmits a single signal. Perhaps, the deﬁning feature of data markets is
the multitude of (potential) participants, data sources, and services. We now pursue the
implications of having many participants (i.e., of many data sources) for the social eﬃciency
of data markets and the price of data.
Each additional consumer presents an additional opportunity for trade in the product
market. Thus, the feasible social surplus is linear in the number of consumers. In addition,
with every additional consumer, the intermediary obtains additional information about mar-
ket demand. These two eﬀects suggest that intermediation becomes increasingly proﬁtable
in larger markets, wherein the potential revenue increases without bound, whereas individual
consumers make a small marginal contribution to the precision of aggregate data.
For this comparative statics analysis, we adopt the following additive data structure.
Speciﬁcally, we assume the willingness to pay of consumer i is the sum of two components:
wi = θ+ θi. (17)
The term θ is common to all consumers in the market, whereas the term θi is idiosyncratic
to consumer i. Similarly, the error term of consumer i is given by
ei ≜ ε+ εi, (18)
where the terms εand εi refer to a common and an idiosyncratic error, respectively. We also
refer to the willingness to pay wi as the fundamental as opposed to the error term ei.
As we vary the number of consumers N, the additive data structure allows us to hold the
pairwise correlation between any two consumers’ fundamentals and noise terms constant. In
particular, let α denote the correlation coeﬃcient of any two ( wi,wj), and let β denote the
correlation coeﬃcient of ( ei,ej).
We ﬁrst establish a suﬃcient condition for the proﬁtability of complete data sharing
as the number of consumers becomes large, and then we analyze the data intermediary’s
revenue and total cost separately.
24

=== PAGE 25 / 57 ===

Proposition 4 (Proﬁtable Intermediation of Anonymized Data)
For any α> 0, there exists N∗ such that anonymized data sharing is proﬁtable if N >N∗.
We already know from Corollary 2 that a high degree of correlation in the consumers’
willingness to pay allows the intermediary to proﬁt from data sharing with suﬃciently precise
signals. Under the optimal data-sharing policy, any degree of correlation in the consumers’
willingness to pay makes the anonymized signals suﬃciently close substitutes that interme-
diation is proﬁtable when N is large.
In Proposition 5, we assume that error terms are independent. This allows us to use the
sample average to establish a lower bound on learning from N−1 signals. We suspect that
similar results hold more generally under correlated errors. 9
Proposition 5 (Large Markets)
Consider the additive data structure and assume that errors are independent across con-
sumers. As N →∞:
1. Each consumer’s compensation m∗
i converges to zero.
2. Total consumer compensation is bounded by a constant,
Nm∗
i ≤9
8 (var [θi] + var [εi]) , ∀N.
3. The intermediary’s revenue and proﬁt grow linearly in N.
As the optimal data policy aggregates the consumers’ signals, each additional consumer
has a rapidly decreasing marginal value. Furthermore, each consumer is paid only for her
marginal contribution; this explains why the total paymentsNmi converge to a ﬁnite number.
Strikingly, this convergence can occur from above : when the consumers’ willingness to pay
is suﬃciently correlated, the decrease in each i’s marginal contribution can be suﬃciently
strong to oﬀset the increase in N.
Whereas total costs converge to a constant, the revenue that the data intermediary can
extract from the producer is linear in the number of consumers. Our model therefore implies
that, as the market size grows without bound, the per capita proﬁt of the data interme-
diary converges to the per capita proﬁt when the (anonymized) data are freely available.
Conversely, the impact on consumer surplus depends on the degree of correlation in the
underlying fundamentals and on the precision of the consumers’ initial signals. 10
9This result holds, for example, when both fundamentals and errors have Gaussian distributions.
10In a recent contribution, Loertscher and Marx (2020) study large digital monopoly markets, where data
have the countervailing eﬀects of improving consumer valuations and increasing monopoly prices.
25

=== PAGE 26 / 57 ===

Figure 2: Total Consumer Compensation ( σw = 1,σe = 0)
Finally, we show that data anonymization is crucial for the large N properties of the
intermediary’s proﬁts. Recall that, with complete data intermediation, individual consumer
payments are proportional to G(S) −G(S−i). As long as fundamentals wi are not perfectly
correlated, these payments are then bounded away from zero for any ﬁnite N. Proposition
6 shows that this property also holds in the limit.
Proposition 6 (Asymptotics with Complete Sharing)
Consider the additive data structure with var[θi] > 0. Under complete (identity-revealing)
data sharing, the asymptotic individual compensation is bounded away from 0:
lim inf
N→∞
m∗
i ≥3
8
var2[θi]
1 + var[ei] >0.
An immediate consequence of Proposition 6 is that, with complete data sharing, total
payments to consumers grow linearly in N. Thus, anonymization is critical to achieving
increasing returns to scale in data intermediation: even in settings where complete data
intermediation X = S is proﬁtable, the per capita proﬁts are bounded away from the full
value of information.
Figure 4.2 illustrates an example with normally distributed fundamentals and errors, in
which it can be less expensive for the intermediary to acquire a larger anonymized dataset
than a smaller one, but not a larger complete dataset.
4.3 Unique Implementation
Our analysis thus far has characterized the intermediary’s most preferred equilibrium. An
ensuing question is whether the qualitative insights and the asymptotic properties discussed
26

=== PAGE 27 / 57 ===

above would hold across all equilibria, particularly in the intermediary’s least preferred equi-
librium. A seminal result in the literature on contracting with externalities (see Segal (1999))
is the “divide-and-conquer” scheme that guarantees a unique equilibrium outcome (see Segal
and Whinston (2000) and Miklos-Thal and Shaﬀer (2016)). Under this scheme, the interme-
diary can sequentially approach consumers and oﬀer compensation conditional on all earlier
consumers having accepted an oﬀer. In this scheme, the ﬁrst consumer receives compensa-
tion equal to her entire surplus loss, thereby guaranteeing her acceptance regardless of the
other consumers’ decisions. More generally, consumer i receives the optimal compensation
level in the baseline equilibrium when N = i.
The cost of acquiring the consumers’ data is strictly higher under “divide and conquer”
than in the intermediary’s most preferred equilibrium. Nonetheless, the impact of the en-
suring unique implementation on per capita proﬁts vanishes in the limit.
Proposition 7 (“Divide and Conquer”)
Consider the additive data structure with independent errors. Under the “Divide and Con-
quer” scheme, total consumer compensation satisﬁes
Nm∗
i ≤3
4(1 + logN)(var[θi] + var[εi]).
Under divide and conquer, the total payments to the consumers do not converge to a
ﬁnite constant as N grows without bound. However, the growth rate of these payments is far
smaller than the rate at which the producer’s willingness to pay for data diverges. Therefore,
regardless of the equilibrium-selection criterion, the intermediary’s per capita proﬁts converge
to the benchmark level when anonymized consumer data are made available.
5 Implications for Consumer Privacy
In this section, we enrich our model along several dimensions to characterize the implications
of the optimal data intermediation policy for consumer privacy. In particular, we consider
richer pricing instruments in the product market, heterogeneous consumers, heterogeneous
product varieties, noisy information collection, and commitment power in the data market.
5.1 Data Anonymization and Social Eﬃciency
In our baseline setting, data anonymization is optimal independent of the model parameters,
such as the number of consumers or the distribution of fundamentals and error terms. This
result relies on two crucial assumptions: (i) consumer are homogeneous, by which we mean
27

=== PAGE 28 / 57 ===

that the distributions of fundamentalswand errors eare symmetric, and (ii) data sharing has
unambiguous welfare eﬀects on product market participants. Indeed, in the model of linear
price discrimination, transmitting Xi anonymously improves consumer and social surplus,
relative to complete data intermediation.
We can generalize this insight to any arbitrary product market interaction beyond the
linear pricing model of the previous section. Proposition 8 generalizes the intuition behind
the optimal anonymization result in Proposition 3: it establishes that social surplus is the
criterion guiding the intermediary’s decision to optimally collect anonymized data.
Proposition 8 (Social Optimality of Data Anonymization)
With homogeneous consumers, anonymized data intermediation is more proﬁtable than com-
plete data intermediation if and only if anonymization increases social surplus.
We note two important aspects of this result. First, it establishes the congruence between
the intermediary private objective and the social welfare with respect to the anonymization
decision only. It does not claim that the equilibrium information ﬂow itself is socially ef-
ﬁcient. Second, the argument does not require any speciﬁc feature of the product market
interaction. As the decision between anonymization and de-anonymization pertains precisely
to the marginal value of the private information of i for the prediction of the willingness to
pay wi, intermediary and consumer i can attain a socially eﬃcient arrangement.
The result has immediate implications for how equilibrium data sharing policies depend
on the nature of the product market interaction. In particular, Proposition 8 allows us to
examine the role of richer pricing instruments. Bergemann, Brooks, and Morris (2015) have
shown that every feasible combination of consumer and producer surplus is consistent with
some form of price discrimination. Proposition 8 shows that, if the producer had the ability
to extract all the expected surplus (given the consumers’ information), then the intermediary
would ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to collect complete, identifying data.
A canonical example where this prediction is relevant is the case of unit demand by the
consumers, where our model would predict the prevalence of perfect price discrimination.
However, to the extent to which consumers have options to retain some surplus ex post, such
as by scaling down their purchase level as in our baseline model, then full surplus extraction
would require the producer to have access to more complex pricing mechanisms.
5.2 Market Segmentation and Data
The assumption of ex ante homogeneity among consumers has enabled us to produce some
of the central implications of social data. A more complete description of consumer de-
28

=== PAGE 29 / 57 ===

mand should introduce heterogeneity across groups of consumers along characteristics such
as location, demographics, income, and wealth.
We now explore how these additional characteristics inﬂuence information policy and
the proﬁts of the data intermediary. To this end, we augment the description of consumer
demand by splitting the population into J homogeneous groups:
wij ∼Fw,j, ei,j ∼Fe,j, i= 1,2,...,N j, j= 1,...,J .
The intermediary’s data inﬂow policy must now specify whether to anonymize the con-
sumers’ signals across groups and within each group. However, Proposition 8 establishes
that it is always more proﬁtable to anonymize all signals within each group, rather than
revealing the consumers’ identities.
Corollary 4 (No Discrimination within Groups)
The data policy that anonymizes all signals within each group j = 1,...,J and only reveals the
group identity of each consumer i is more proﬁtable than the complete data-sharing policy.
By further specifying the model, we can identify conditions under which the data in-
termediary will collect and transmit group characteristics. By collecting information about
the group characteristics, the intermediary inﬂuences the extent of price discrimination. For
example, the intermediary could anonymize all signals across groups, thus forcing the pro-
ducer to oﬀer only a single price. Alternatively, the intermediary could allow the producer
to discriminate between two groups of consumers by recording and transmitting the group
identities. As intuition would suggest, enabling price discrimination across groups not only
allows the intermediary to charge a higher fee to the producer but also increases the com-
pensation owed to consumers.
Proposition 9 below sheds light on the optimal resolution of this trade-oﬀ. In this result,
we restrict attention to the case of symmetric groups ( Nj = N for all j), with the additive
data structure wi = θ+ θi, and independent noise terms in the consumers’ signals.
Proposition 9 (Segmentation)
If N is large enough, inducing group-level pricing is more proﬁtable for the intermediary
than inducing uniform pricing.
Whereas Proposition 3 stated that the intermediary will not reveal any information about
consumer identity, Proposition 9 reﬁnes that result: if the market is suﬃciently large, then
the intermediary will convey limited identity information, i.e., each consumer’s group iden-
tity. This policy allows the producer to price discriminate across, but not within, groups.
29

=== PAGE 30 / 57 ===

Figure 3: Marginal Value of an Additional Consumer
Conversely, if the producer faces few consumers and their willingness to pay are not highly
correlated, then pooling all signals reduces the cost of sourcing the data.
The limited amount of price discrimination, which operates optimally at the group level
rather than the individual level, can explain the behavior of many platforms. For example,
Uber and Amazon claim that they do not discriminate at the individual level, but they
condition prices on location, time, and other dimensions that capture group characteristics.
The result in Proposition 9 is perhaps the sharpest manifestation of the value of big
data. By enabling the producer to adopt a richer pricing model, a larger database allows the
intermediary to extract more surplus. Our result also clariﬁes the appetite of the platforms
for large datasets: because having more consumers allows the platform to proﬁtably segment
the market more precisely, the value of the marginal consumer i = N to the intermediary
remains large even as N grows. In other words, allowing the producer to segment the market
is akin to paying a ﬁxed cost (i.e., higher compensation to the current consumers) to access a
better technology (i.e., one that scales more easily with N). Figure 5.2 illustrates this result
for an example with normally distributed fundamentals and errors.
The optimality of using a richer pricing model when larger datasets are available is
reminiscent of model selection criteria under overﬁtting concerns, e.g., the Akaike information
criterion. In our setting, however, the optimality of inducing segmentation is not driven by
econometric considerations. Instead, it is entirely driven by the intermediary’s cost-beneﬁt
analysis in acquiring more precise information from consumers. As the data externality
grows suﬃciently strong, acquiring the data becomes cheaper as the intermediary exploits
the richer structure of consumer demand. 11
Finally, the welfare ranking of the two pricing schemes (group vs. uniform) is a priori
ambiguous. In particular, group pricing can yield lower total surplus than uniform pricing,
11Olea, Ortoleva, Pai, and Prat (2019) oﬀer a demand-side explanation of a similar phenomenon: they
showed that data buyers who employ a richer pricing model are willing to pay more for larger datasets.
30

=== PAGE 31 / 57 ===

e.g., when consumers know their willingness to pay and group pricing results in ineﬃcient
price discrimination. In other words, outside of the conditions of Proposition 8 (e.g., with
heterogeneous consumers), market segmentation can be driven purely by the data externality.
5.3 Recommender System
In our baseline model, the data shared by the intermediary are used by the producer to
set prices and by consumers to learn about their own preferences. The ﬁrst assumption
is, in a sense, the worst-case scenario for the intermediary: consider the case in which
consumers’ initial signals are very precise. As price discrimination reduces total surplus, no
intermediation would be proﬁtable without a strong, negative data externality. Consequently,
data aggregation is an essential part of the optimal data intermediation policy in this case.
In practice, however, consumer data can also be used by the producer in surplus-enhancing
ways, for example, to facilitate targeting quality levels and other product characteristics to
the consumer’s tastes.
In this section, we develop a generalization of our framework; this generalization allows
the producer to charge a unit price pi and to oﬀer a product of characteristic ki to each
consumer. Consumers diﬀer both in their vertical willingness to pay and in their horizontal
taste for the product’s characteristics. Consumer i’s utility function is given by
ui(wi,qi,pi,ki,ℓi) = (wi −(ki −ℓi)2 −pi)qi −q2
i/2,
with wi denoting the consumer’s willingness to pay and ℓi denoting the consumer’s ideal
location or product characteristic. Both the willingness to pay w ∈RN and the locations
ℓ ∈ RN of diﬀerent consumers are potentially correlated. The producer has a constant
marginal cost of quantity provision that we normalize to zero and can freely set the product’s
characteristic. Therefore, the case of a common location ℓi ≡ℓ for all consumers yields the
baseline model of price discrimination.
We examine the data intermediary’s optimal data inﬂow policy, which allows for separate
aggregation policies for willingness to pay and location information. We impose the following
assumptions: (i) the gains from trade under no information sharing are suﬃciently large;
(ii) the consumers’ fundamentals have a joint Gaussian distribution; and (iii) consumer i
perfectly observes ( wi,ℓi). The extension to noisy Gaussian signals is immediate. We then
obtain another application of Proposition 8.
Proposition 10 (Optimal Aggregation by a Recommender System)
The intermediary’s optimal policy collects anonymized data on the vertical component wi and
31

=== PAGE 32 / 57 ===

complete data on the horizontal component ℓi.
Therefore, the recommender system enables the producer to oﬀer targeted product char-
acteristics that match ki to ℓi as closely as possible. However, the system does not allow for
personalized pricing. The logic is once again given by the intermediary’s sources of proﬁts,
i.e., the contribution to social welfare ∆ W and the data externality DE. Because the data
externalities do not depend on the level of data anonymization, the intermediary chooses
to aggregate the vertical dimension of consumer data, thereby reducing the total surplus if
transmitted to the producer. Conversely, because the distance between a consumer’s ideal
product and the ﬁrm’s oﬀer ( ki −ℓi)2 shifts the consumer’s demand function down, the
intermediary allows for the personalization of product characteristics.
5.4 Intermediary with Commitment
We have assumed thus far that the intermediary cannot refrain from selling information
to the producer and cannot sell any acquired data inﬂow back to the consumers. The
latter assumption entails no loss: consumers know that the intermediary sells the data to
the producer, and therefore expect to receive all available information regardless of their
participation decisions (Proposition 1), because they know that revealing this information
maximizes the producer’s fee.
The no commitment assumption reﬂects the substantial control that large online plat-
forms have over the use of the data and the opacity with which the data outﬂow is linked to
the data inﬂow. In other words, it is diﬃcult to ascertain how any given data input informs
an intermediary’s data output. Nonetheless, it is useful to consider the implications of the
data intermediary’s ability to commit to a certain data policy, especially in light of the wel-
fare properties of data sharing discussed above. To that end, suppose the data intermediary
oﬀered the consumers contracts that specify a data inﬂow and a data outﬂow policy.
Through richer contracts, the data intermediary can oﬀer consumers privacy guarantees.
In particular, the intermediary can implement the socially eﬃcient data-sharing policy, which
consists of sharing all signals among all the consumers who accept the contract and not
sharing any data at all with the producer (Corollary 1). In exchange for this commitment,
the data intermediary requests compensation from the consumers. In turn, consumers are
willing to pay a positive price for these data, and hence the socially optimal data sharing is
always proﬁtable.12
12This environment with commitment is related to the analysis in Lizzeri (1999) but has a number of
distinct features. First, in Lizzeri (1999), the private information is held by a single agent, and multiple
downstream ﬁrms compete for the information and for the object oﬀered by the agent. Second, the privately
32

=== PAGE 33 / 57 ===

However, the equilibrium outcome under these stronger commitment assumptions fails
to capture the role of large online platforms. Even though there are examples in which
consumers pay a positive price to access tailored, non-sponsored recommendations, data in-
termediaries choose to monetize the producers’ side of their platform much more frequently.
Moreover, the socially eﬃcient policy need not maximize the intermediary’s proﬁts. For
example, if fundamentals are perfectly correlated and signals are arbitrarily precise, the
intermediary’s proﬁts from the ﬁrst-best policy are nil. Under these conditions, an inter-
mediary with commitment (or even an intermediary who sells its own products) would not
monetize their information by selling it to consumers .
It is beyond the scope of this article to characterize the optimal commitment policy
for any initial data structure, but the data externality clearly remains a key driver of the
equilibrium allocation of information even under stronger commitment assumptions.
6 Conclusion
We have explored the trading of information between data intermediaries with market power
and multiple consumers with correlated preferences. The data externality that we have
uncovered strongly suggests that levels of compensation close to zero can induce an individual
consumer in a large market to relinquish precise information about her preferences. This
ﬁnding holds even if the consumer’s data are later sold to a ﬁrm that seeks to extract their
surplus. Thus, giving consumers control rights over their data (a pillar of privacy regulation
such as the EU General Data Protection Regulation or the California Privacy Rights Act)
is insuﬃcient to bring about the eﬃcient use of information.
Our results regarding the aggregation of consumer information further suggest that pri-
vacy regulations must move away from concerns over personalized prices at the individual
level. Most often, ﬁrms do not set prices in response to individual-level characteristics. In-
stead, segmentation of consumers occurs at the group level (e.g., as in the case of Uber)
or at the temporal and spatial levels (e.g., as in the case of Staples and Amazon). Thus,
our analysis points to the signiﬁcant welfare eﬀects of group-level and market-level, dynamic
prices that react in real time to changes in demand.
A possible mitigator of the consequences of data externalities—echoed in Posner and Weyl
(2018)—consists of facilitating the formation of consumer groups or unions to internalize
the data externality when bargaining with powerful intermediaries, such as large online
informed agent enters the contract after she has observed her private information. The shared insight is
that the intermediary with commitment power might be able to extract a rent without any inﬂuence on the
eﬃciency of the allocation.
33

=== PAGE 34 / 57 ===

platforms.13 A diﬀerent regulatory solution is based on privacy managers, such as internet
browsers with heterogeneous privacy settings that compete for consumers’ default choice. Yet
another solution—suggested by Romer (2019)—consists of making the data outﬂow costly
for the intermediary by, for example, taxing targeted advertising. In our model, taxing
the data outﬂow will limit eﬃcient and ineﬃcient intermediation alike but will aﬀect the
intermediary’s choice of data policy under the assumptions of Section 5.4.
Finally, our data intermediary collected and redistributed the consumer data but played
no role in the interaction between the consumers and the producer. In contrast, a consumer
can often access a given producer only through a data platform. 14 Many platforms can then
be thought of as auctioning access to the consumer. The data platform provides the bidding
producers with additional information that they can use to tailor their interactions with
consumers. Social data platforms thus trade individual consumer information for services
rather than money. In these markets, the data externality manifests itself in the quality of
the services oﬀered and in the extent of the consumers’ engagement.
13This result echoes the claim in Zuboﬀ (2019) that “privacy is a public issue.”
14Product data platforms, such as Amazon, Uber and Lyft, acquire individual data from the consumer
through the consumers’ purchase of services and products. Social data platforms, such as Google and
Facebook, oﬀer data services to individual users and sell the information to third parties, who mostly
purchase the information in the form of targeted advertising space. In terms of our model, a product data
platform combines the roles of data intermediation and product pricing.
34

=== PAGE 35 / 57 ===

7 Appendix A
Proof of Lemma 1. Under an arbitrary data-inﬂow policy X, each consumer i observes
a noisy signal Si of her own willingness to pay and sends a potentially noisier signal Xi to
the intermediary.15 Consumer i observes both Si and Xi. Given the data inﬂow X, the
intermediary chooses an outﬂow policy, namely, the signal Y0 = Y0(X) sent to the producer
and the signal Yi = Yi(X) sent to each consumer i. The intermediary then chooses a policy
Y that maximizes the producer’s ex ante expected payoﬀ, which it fully extracts through
the fee m0. We let the intermediary selects their favorite equilibrium in the ensuing game.
For any outﬂow policy Y = ( Y0,Yi), denote an induced signaling equilibrium as ¯ γ =
(¯qi,¯p), where ¯p: Y0 →R+ is the pricing strategy of the producer and ¯qi : Yi×Si×Xi×R+ →
R+ is the demand function of consumer i. We ﬁrst argue that there exists an equilibrium γ∗
under the outﬂow policy (¯p◦Y0,(Yi,¯p◦Y0)) that yields a weakly higher ex ante payoﬀ for the
producer. In this new outﬂow policy, instead of revealingY0 to the producer, the intermediary
directly recommends the price ¯p(Y) which coincides with the equilibrium pricing strategy in
¯γ, and reveals to consumer i both Yi and the price recommendation.
On the equilibrium path of ¯γ, consumer iupdates her posterior µ(Yi,Si,¯pi(Y)) using Yi,
her own private signalSi, the report Xi, and the observed pricepi. We denote the consumer’s
demand as a function of her posterior beliefs and the price as
qi(µ(Yi,Si,Xi,pi),pi).
The ex ante proﬁt of the producer from consumer i is given by
E[¯piqi(µ(Yi,Si,Xi,¯pi),¯pi)] .
Now consider the new outﬂow policy (¯p◦Y0,(Yi,¯p◦Y0)). Under this policy, there exists
an equilibrium where consumer iforms her demand using the data outﬂow ( Yi,p∗◦Y0) from
the intermediary as well as her own signal Si and the data inﬂow Xi. Because consumer
i knows everything that the producer knows, the price charged by the producer no longer
inﬂuences the consumer’s posterior, which therefore coincides with the on-path beliefs in the
original equilibrium ¯γ, i.e.,
µ(Yi,Si,Xi,¯pi(Y0)).
Knowing this, the producer maximizes his ex ante payoﬀ by choosing a pricing strategy ˆp(·)
15Under complete data sharing, for example, the consumer either reports Xi = Si or refuses to participate,
so that Xi has inﬁnite variance (or the corresponding σ-algebra is the empty set).
35

=== PAGE 36 / 57 ===

as a function of his signal ¯p◦Y0. Thus the producer’s equilibrium proﬁt is given by
max
ˆp
ˆp
(
¯p◦Y0
)
qi
(
µ(Yi,Si,Xi,¯pi(Y0)),ˆp
(
¯p◦Y0
))
.
Clearly “following the intermediary’s recommendation,” i.e., setting ˆ p(p) = p is a feasible
strategy that yields the same payoﬀ as in the old equilibrium ¯γ. Consequently, the producer’s
equilibrium payoﬀ is weakly higher than in ¯γ.
Proof of Proposition 1. For any oﬀered price pi, consumer i demands the quantity
qi = E[wi|(Si,Yi)] −pi.
The producer ﬁnds it optimal to set the following price
pi = E[wi|Y0]
2 .
Recall that the consumer always has superior information so that Y0 is measurable with
respect to Yi. The proﬁt of the producer is given by
Πi((Si,Yi),Y0) = E
[E[wi|Y0]
2
(
E[wi|(Si,Yi)] −E[wi|Y0]
2
)]
= E[(E[wi|Y0])2]
4 = var[E[wi|Y0]] + E[wi]2
4 (19)
= 1
4G(Y0) + Πi(Si,∅) ,
where the outside expectation represents integration over the whole probability space. The
expected consumer surplus is given by
Ui((Si,Yi),Y0) = E
[(
wi −E[wi|Y0]
2
)(
E[wi|(Si,Yi)] −E[wi|Y0]
2
)]
−1
2E
[(
E[wi|(Si,Yi)] −E[wi|Y0]
2
)2]
(20)
= 1
2E[(E[wi|(Si,Yi)])2 −3
4(E[wi|Y0])2],
= 1
2 (G((Si,Yi)) −G(Si)) −3
8G(Y0) + Ui(Si,∅) (21)
Finally, the impact on total surplus is given by the sum of the two eﬀects:
Wi((Si,Yi),Y0) −Wi(Si,∅) = 1
2 (G((Si,Yi)) −G(Si)) −1
8G(Y0) ,
36

=== PAGE 37 / 57 ===

which completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 2. By Lemma 1, it is without loss of generality to assume
the producer receives a signal Y, and the consumer receives a signal ( Yi,Y ). Thus, we can
focus on equilibria where prices have no signaling eﬀect. These equilibria coincide with those
described in Proposition 1. As we have shown there, the proﬁt of the producer is:
E
[E[wi|Y]
2
(
E[wi|Y ∪Yi,Si,Xi] −E[wi|Y]
2
)]
= E[(E[wi|Y])2]
4 = var[E[wi|Y]] + E[wi]2
4 .
Therefore it is optimal to maximize var[ E[wi|Y]], which is achieved by setting Y = X.
Hence, the intermediary reveals all information collected (Y = X) both to the producer and
to consumer i.
Proof of Corollary 2. When fundamentals wi are perfectly correlated,
E[wi|S] = E[θ|S] = E[θ|S1,...,S N],
E[wi|S−i] = E[θ|S−i],
var[E[θ|S−i]] = var[E[θ|S1,...,S N−1]].
Under our symmetry assumption, the variance of the posterior expectation of the common
willingness to pay var[ E[θ|S1,..,N]] can be written as a function of N. Now we argue that
var[E[θ|S1,..,N]] is increasing in N. We ﬁrst deﬁne g(S1,...,N−1) ≜ E[θ|S1,..,N−1]. Then, accord-
ing to Lemma 3 below, we have
var[E[θ|S1,..,N]] = max
f∈L2
var[θ] −E[(θ−g(S1,...,N))2],
≥max
f∈L2
var[θ] −E[(θ−g(S1,...,N−1))2],
= var[E[θ|S1,..,N−1]].
The sequence var[E[θ|S1,..,N]] is increasing and bounded. Therefore, it converges:
lim
N→∞
G(S) = lim
N→∞
G(S−i),
and intermediation is then proﬁtable:
lim
N→∞
R(S)
N = 1
4 lim
N→∞
G(S) >0.
37

=== PAGE 38 / 57 ===

In the limit for N →∞, the data externality and the consumer surplus are given by
lim
N→∞
Ui(S,S) −Ui(Si,∅) = lim
N→∞
E[1
8(E[wi|S])2 −1
2(E[wi|Si] −E[wi])2 −1
8E[wi]2]
= lim
N→∞
1
8 var[E[wi|S]] −1
2 var[E[wi|Si]],
lim
N→∞
DEi(S) = lim
N→∞
1
2 var[E[wi|S]] −1
2 var[E[wi|Si]] −3
8 var[E[wi|S−i]]
= lim
N→∞
1
8 var[E[wi|S]] −1
2 var[E[wi|Si]].
Therefore, when the initial noise is suﬃciently small (i.e., when var[ E[wi|Si]] is close to
var[wi]), the data externality is negative and data sharing hurts consumers.
Proof of Corollary 3. Because wi is independent from the other consumers’ signals,
we have var[ E[wi|S−i]] = 0. Thus, intermediation is always unproﬁtable, and the data
externality is always positive,
R(S) = −N
8 var[E[wi|S]] <0,
DEi(S) = 1
2(var[E[wi|S]] −var[E[wi|Si]]) ≥0.
Finally, for the results on consumer surplus, we turn to Lemma 3. In particular, we know
var[E[wi|S]] = var[wi] −E[(wi −E[wi|S])2],
≥var[wi] −E[(wi −(si − 1
N −1Σj̸=isj))2],
= var[θi] −E[(θi −(θi + ε− 1
N −1Σj̸=iθj −ε))2],
= var[θi] −E[( 1
N −1Σj̸=iθj)2] = N −2
N −1 var[θi] →var[wi].
Thus we obtain
lim
N→∞
Ui(S,S) −Ui(Si,∅) = 1
8 var[wi] −1
2 var[E[wi|Si]].
When σ is suﬃciently large, so that var[ E[wi|Si]] is close to 0, intermediation increases
consumer surplus.
The proof of Proposition 2 follows from expressions (15) and (16) in the text.
Proof of Proposition 3. In the main text, the data inﬂow from consumer iis given by
Xi = Si (under complete sharing) and we compare it with X∗
i = δ(Si) (under anonymiza-
tion). Note that ( Si,Xi)i in this case is symmetrically distributed, i.e., its joint density is
38

=== PAGE 39 / 57 ===

unchanged under permutations of indices. Here we prove a slightly more general version of
the result by allowing an arbitrary information inﬂow X such that (Si,Xi)i is symmetrically
distributed.16 We assume that apart from the private signal Si and information outﬂow
Yi provided by the intermediary, consumer i also observes her own data inﬂow Xi. This
assumption is needed because information set ( Si,Xi,X∗
−i) and ( Si,Xi,X∗) are equivalent
by construction, but ( Si,X∗
−i) and ( Si,X∗) maybe not. Note that when we restrict to the
less general case (when Xi = Si), the latter holds automatically, so we do not need this
assumption.
For any ﬁxed inﬂow policy X, we refer to p−i as the oﬀ-path price charged to consumer i
when she does not accept the intermediary’s contract, and to pi as the on-path price charged
to consumer i. Now consider another inﬂow policy X∗ identical to X up to a random
permutation of the consumers’ identities. Under this scheme, we refer to p∗
−i as the oﬀ-path
price for consumer i, and to p∗
i as the on-path price for consumer i.
We ﬁrst argue that p−i = p∗
−i for any realization of W,S,X . To do so, let us calculate
consumer i’s posterior about Wi under each inﬂow policy. Under the non-anonymized scheme,
the posterior distribution of consumer i’s willingness to pay is given by
fi(Wi = wi|Si = si,Xi = xi,X = x)
=
∫
f(Wi = wi,W−i = w′
−i,Si = si,S−i = s′
−i,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)ds′
−idw′
−i∫
f(W = w′,Si = si,S−i = s′
−i,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)ds′
−idw′ .
Recall from Proposition 2 that the intermediary’s optimal data outﬂow policy consists
of revealing to the consumers all the available information, even if the consumer refuses to
participate. When the data is anonymized, because consumer iknows her own report Xi, the
data outﬂow reveals to her the vector of reports X−i without knowing who generated each
one. We now deﬁne δ ∈Sn−1 as permutation of consumer indices. Consumer i’s posterior
distribution over her willingness to pay wi is now given by
fi(Wi = wi|Si = si,Xi = xi,X∗
−i = x−i).
For notational simplicity, we use Pr to denote both probability and the proper marginal
16For example, in Section 7 Xi might be a noisier signal of Si.
39

=== PAGE 40 / 57 ===

density. Then the posterior can be rewritten as
Pr(Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X∗
−i = x−i)
Pr(Si = si,Xi = xi,X∗
−i = x−i)
= Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ,Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i))
Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i))
= Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ) Pr(Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i))
Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ)Pr(Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i)) .
Because of the symmetry assumption, we know that
Pr(Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i))
=
∫
f(Wi = wi,W−i = w′
−i,Si = si,S−i = s′
−i,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i))ds′
−idw′
−i
=
∫
f(Wi = wi,W−i = w′
δ−1(−i),Si = si,S−i = s′
δ−1(−i),Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)ds′
−idw′
−i
=
∫
f(Wi = wi,W−i = w′
δ−1(−i),Si = si,S−i = s′
δ−1(−i),Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)ds′
δ−1(−i)dw′
δ−1(−i)
= Pr(Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i).
For the same reason, we also have
Pr(Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = xδ(−i)) = Pr(Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i).
Thus the posterior of consumer i can be simpliﬁed as:
fi(Wi = wi|Si = si,Xi = xi,X∗
−i = x−i)
= Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ) Pr(Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)
Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ)Pr(Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)
=
Σδ∈Sn−1 1
|Sn−1|Pr(Wi = wi,Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)
Σδ∈Sn−1 1
|Sn−1|Pr(Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)
= fi(Wi = wi|Si = si,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i).
We have therefore proved that consumer i has the same posterior about her willingness to
pay wi for any realization of W,S,X irrespective of whether the data are anonymized of not.
Furthermore, this holds both on and oﬀ the path of play.
Next, we show that the producer also has the same posterior about Wi for any realization
of W,S,X when consumer i refuses to report. Under the non-anonymized scheme, the
40

=== PAGE 41 / 57 ===

posterior density is given by:
fi(Wi = wi|X = x) =
∫
f(Wi = wi,W−i = w′
−i,S = s′,Xi = xi,X−i = x−i)ds′dw′
−i∫
f(W = w′,S = s′,X = xi,X−i = x−i)ds′dw′ .
Under the anonymized scheme, the posterior density is given by
fi(Wi = wi|X∗= x) = Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ) Pr(Wi = wi,X = δ(x))
Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ) Pr(X = δ(x))
By the earlier argument, we can simplify it as follows:
Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ) Pr(Wi = wi,X = x)
Σδ∈Sn−1 Pr(δ) Pr(X = x) = fi(Wi = wi|X = x)
Because the posteriors for both parties are the same for any realization, so is the price, and
hence the welfare impact of information
The proﬁt of the intermediary from consumer i’s data under inﬂow policy X is given by
Ri(X) = Π(X,X) −Π(Si,∅) −Ui((Si,X−i),X−i) + Ui((Si,X),X).
We have argued that consumer surplus oﬀ the path is the same:
Ui((Si,X−i),X−i) = Ui((Si,X∗
−i),X∗
−i).
We now turn to the last term—the impact on social welfare on the path of play:
Π((Si,X),X) + Ui((Si,X),X)
= 1
2E[(E[wi|Si,Xi,X] −E[wi|X])2 + 1
4(E[wi|X])2] + var[E[wi|X]]
4
= 1
2 var[E[wi|Si,Xi,X]] −1
8 var[E[wi|X]].
Recall that consumer ihas the same on path posterior under two diﬀerent scheme. Therefore,
the diﬀerence in the intermediary’s proﬁts under the two policies reduces to
1
2 var[E[wi|Si,Xi,X]] −1
8 var[E[wi|X]] −1
2 var[E[wi|Si,Xi,X∗]] + 1
8 var[E[wi|X∗]]
= −1
8 var[E[wi|X]] + 1
8 var[E[wi|X∗]] ≤0.
Therefore, anonymization is more proﬁtable than complete sharing, and strictly so whenever
anonymization makes the estimation less precise.
41

=== PAGE 42 / 57 ===

In the remainder of the Appendix, we often make use of the following classical result in
statistics, which we state as a lemma without proof—the result is an immediate consequence
of the fact that E[X|Y] is the projection of X on F(Y) in L2 space.
Lemma 3 Let W and Y be two random variables. Then it holds that
var[E[W|Y]] = var[W] −E[(W −E[W|Y])2] ≤var[W],
and
E[(W −E[W|Y])2] ≤E[(W −f(Y))2], ∀f ∈L2.
To prove Proposition 4, we ﬁrst state a basic property of anonymized data sharing in our
symmetric environment.
Lemma 4 When the data is anonymized, the following holds:
E[wi|A] = E[wj|A].
Proof of Lemma 4. Denote the joint distribution of W and S as f(W = w,S = s)
and the posterior of Wi after observing A as f(Wi = w|A). Denote the permutation in SN
as ν and especially the swapping between i and j as νij. For notational simplicity, we use
Pr to denote both probability and the proper marginal density.
fi(Wi = wi|A= s) = Pr(Wi = wi,A = s)
Pr(A= s) = Σν∈SN Pr(ν) Pr(Wi = wi,Sν = s))
Pr(A= s)
=
Σν∈SN 1
|SN |
∫
f(Wi = wi,Wj = wj,W−ij = w−ij,Sν = s)dwjdw−ij
Pr(A= s) .
Because f is unchanged under permutation, we can apply the following transformation:
fi(Wi = wi|A= s) =
Σν∈SN 1
|SN |
∫
f(Wj = wi,Wi = wj,W−ij = w−ij,Sνij◦ν = s)dwjdw−ij
Pr(A= s) ,
=
Σνij◦ν∈SN 1
|SN |
∫
f(Wj = wi,Wi = w′
i,W−ij = w−ij,Sνij◦ν = s)dw′
idw−ij
Pr(A= s) = fj(Wj = wi|A= s).
Because the posterior distribution is the same, so is the conditional expectation because
E[wi|A] =
∫
wifi(Wi = wi|A)dwi,
which completes the proof.
42

=== PAGE 43 / 57 ===

Proof of Proposition 4. Combining Lemmas 3 and 4, we obtain
E[wi|A] = E[ 1
NΣiwi|A] = E[θ+ 1
NΣiθi|A];
G(A) = var[E[θ+ 1
NΣiθi|A]] = var[θ+ 1
NΣiθi] −E[(θ+ 1
NΣiθi −E[θ+ 1
NΣiθi|A])2].
We can simplify the last term as follows:
E[(θ+ 1
NΣiθi −E[θ+ 1
NΣiθi|A])2]
= E[(θ−E[θ|A])2 + 1
N2 (Σiθi −ΣiE[θi|A])2 − 2
N(θ−E[θ|A])(Σiθi −ΣiE[θi|A])]
≥E[(θ−E[θ|A])2] − 2
N
√
var[θ−E[θ|A]] var[Σiθi −ΣiE[θi|A]]
≥E[(θ−E[θ|A])2] − 2
N
√
Nvar[θ] var[θi],
where the last inequality comes from Lemma 3. The intermediary’s proﬁt can be written as
R= 3G(A−i) −G(A),
= 3 var[E[θ|A−i]] −var[θ] − 1
N var[θi] + E[(θ+ 1
NΣiθi −E[θ+ 1
NΣiθi|A])2],
≥3 var[E[θ|A−i]] −var[θ] − 1
N var[θi] + E[(θ−E[θ|A])2] − 2
N
√
Nvar[θ] var[θi]
= 3 var[E[θ|A−i]] −var[E[θ|A]] − 1
N var[θi] − 2√
N
√
var[θ] var[θi].
Therefore, in the limit we have:
lim
N→∞
R= 2 lim
N→∞
var[E[θ|A]] >0,
which completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 5. We ﬁrst prove that the total compensation is bounded from
above, which immediately implies that the individual compensation goes to 0 as N →∞.
From Lemma 4, we know that
G(A) = var[E[wi|A]] = var[E[Σi
wi
N|A]],
≤var[Σi
wi
N] = var[θ] + var[θi] + var[εi]
N .
43

=== PAGE 44 / 57 ===

On the other hand, we also know
G(A−i) = var[E[θ|A−i]] = var[θ] −E[(θ−E[θ|A−i])2].
Because the conditional expectation is the best L2 approximation, we know it leads to a
smaller error than the “sample average estimator,”
E
[
(θ−E[θ|A−i])2]
≤E
[
θ− 1
N −1Σj̸=i(θ+ θj + εj)2
]
= 1
N −1(var[θi] + var[εj]).
Therefore, we have:
N(G(A) −G(A−i)) ≤N
(
var[θ] + var[θi] + var[εi]
N −var[θ] + 1
N −1(var[θi] + var[εj])
)
,
= N
(var[θi] + var[εi]
N + 1
N −1(var[θi] + var[εi])
)
≤3(var[θi] + var[εi]).
The total consumer compensation is then given by
3N
8 (G(A) −G(A−i)) ≤9
8(var[θi] + var[εi]).
Finally, the intermediary’s proﬁt is growing linearly in N because
R(S) = N
4 G(A) −3N
8 (G(A) −G(A−i)),
lim
N→∞
R(S)
N = 1
4 lim
N→∞
G(A),
which completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 6. When data is not anonymized we have:
G(S) −G(S−i) = var[E[θ+ θi|S]] −var[E[θ|S−i]].
Because of symmetry, we have
cov[E[θ|S],E[θi|S]] = cov[E[θ|S],E[θj|S]] = cov[E[θ|S],ΣN
j=1E[θj/N|S]].
44

=== PAGE 45 / 57 ===

Because the correlation coeﬃcient is always greater than −1, we obtain
cov[E[θ|S],ΣN
j=1E[θj/N|S]] ≥−
√
var[θ] var[ΣN
j=1E[θj/N|S]],
≥−
√
var[θ] var[ΣN
j=1θj/N].
Therefore, according to Lemma 3 we have:
G(S) −G(S−i) = var[E[θ|S]] + 2 cov[E[θ|S],E[θi|S]] + var[E[θi|S]] −var[E[θ|S−i]]
≥var[E[θ|S]] −2 1√
N
√
var[θ] var[θi] + var[E[θi|S]] −var[E[θ|S−i]],
and hence
lim inf
N→∞
G(S) −G(S−i) ≥var[E[θi|S]].
The last term is strictly positive because
var[E[θi|S]] = var[θi] −E[(θi −E[θi|S])2]
≥var[θi] −E[(θi − var[θi]
var[θi] + var[θ] + var[e]Si)2],
= var[θi] −(var[θi] − var2[θi]
var[θi] + var[θ] + var[e]),
= var2[θi]
var[θi] + var[θ] + var[e] >0,
where the ﬁrst inequality again uses Lemma 3.
Proof of Proposition 7. In the standard “divide and conquer” scheme, the compen-
sation for the i-th consumer is the marginal loss of revealing her information given that i−1
consumers reveal their signals:
3
8G(S1,...,i) −3
8G(S1,...,i−1).
Because in general we do not know whether this marginal loss is decreasing in i, we consider
the following revised version of divide and conquer, where consumer i receives
mi = max
k≥i
3
8G(S1,...,k) −3
8G(S1,...,k−1).
Under this payment scheme, it is a dominant strategy for consumer 1 to accept the oﬀer.
Moreover, it is optimal for consumer ito accept the oﬀer, given that the ﬁrst i−1 consumers
45

=== PAGE 46 / 57 ===

accept. Using an identical proof to Proposition 5, we obtain
3
8G(S1,...,i) −3
8G(S1,...,i−1) ≤3
8(1
i + 1
i−1)(var[θi] + var[εi]),
≤3
4
1
i−1(var[θi] + var[εi]).
Therefore, we obtain an upper bound on the compensation paid to consumer i :
mi ≤max
k≥i
3
4
1
k−1(var[θi] + var[εi]) = 3
4
1
i−1(var[θi] + var[εi]).
Finally, because we have
Σi
3
8(G(S1,...,i) −G(S1,...,i−1)) ≤3
4(1 + ΣN
i=3
1
i−1)(var[θi] + var[εi]),
≤3
4(1 + logN)(var[θi] + var[εi]),
the total compensation grows at a speed less than log N.
Proof of Proposition 8. The proof of this proposition is similar to that of Proposi-
tion 3. By Lemma 1, we know that the intermediary will transmit whatever information it
collected to all consumers. By homogeneity, we know the consumer’s posterior about their
own fundamental wij is the same whether the signals are anonymized or not, and the pro-
ducer’s posterior about any deviating consumer’s fundamental is also the same under the
two schemes.
Denote the broker’s revenue under the non-anonymized and anonymized scheme asR(X)
and R(X∗), respectively. It then holds that
Ri(X) = Π(X,X) −Π(Si,∅) −Ui((Si,X−i),X−i) + Ui((Si,X),X),
Ri(X∗) = Π(X∗,X∗) −Π(Si,∅) −Ui((Si,X∗
−i),X∗
−i) + Ui((Si,X∗),X∗).
Our analysis in previous paragraph implies
Ui((Si,X−i),X−i) = Ui((Si,X∗
−i),X∗
−i).
Therefore the intermediary prefers anonymization if and only if
Ri(X∗) −Ri(X) = W((Si,X∗),X∗) −W((Si,X),X) ≥0,
which completes the proof.
46

=== PAGE 47 / 57 ===

Proof of Proposition 9. We ﬁrst consider the case where the intermediary anonymizes
all data, including the group identities. Similar to the result in Lemma 4 (A.2 in the latest
draft), we know that the producer oﬀers one price to all consumers on the path of play,
E[wij|A] = E[wi′j′|A].
Denoting N = ΣjNj, we have
E[wi′j′|A] = 1
ΣjNj
ΣjΣiE[wij|A] = 1
ΣjNj
ΣjΣiE[θj + θij|A]
= Σj
Nj
N E[θj|A] + 1
NE[Σjiθij|A].
Therefore we obtain an upper bound on the revenue per capita
R(A)
N = 3
8G(A−ij) −1
8G(A) = 3
8[E[wij]|A−ij] −1
8 var[E[wij]|A]
≤1
4 var[E[wij]|A] = 1
4 var[Σj
Nj
N E[θj|A] + 1
NE[Σjiθij|A]]
≤1
4
1
N2 ΣN2
j var[θj] + 1
4N var[θij].
Next, consider the case where the intermediary reveals the group identity. Instead of A we
use Ag to denote the information that the producer receives. By an argument similar to the
proof of Lemma 4 (A.2 in the latest draft), we know that (on path) the producer oﬀers one
price to all consumers in each group:
E[wij|Ag] = E[wi′j|Ag]
= 1
Nj
Σ
Nj
i′=1E[wi′j|Ag] = 1
Nj
Σ
Nj
i′=1E[wi′j|Ag] = E[θj + 1
Nj
Σ
Nj
i′=1θi′j|Ag].
When consumer ij rejects the oﬀer, the intermediary will know the group identity of this
deviating consumer and use all the available data to estimate the demand:
E[wij|Ag
−ij] = E[θj + θij|Ag
−ij] = E[θj|Ag
−ij].
47

=== PAGE 48 / 57 ===

The revenue that the intermediary obtains from consumer ij’s data is then given by
3
8 var[E[wij]|Ag
−ij] −1
8 var[E[wij]|Ag],
= 3
8 var[E[θj|Ag
−ij]] −1
8 var[E[θj + 1
Nj
Σ
Nj
i′=1θi′j|Ag]],
≥3
8 var[E[θj|Ag
−ij]] −1
8 var[θj] − 1
8Nj
var[θij] −1
4
√
1
Nj
var[θj]
√
var[θij].
From Lemma 3 (A.1 in the latest draft), we know
E[(θj −E[θj|Ag
−ij])2] ≤E[(θj − 1
Nj −1Σi′̸=isi′j)2],
= E[( 1
Nj −1Σi′̸=i −θi′j −εi′j)2] = var[θij] + var[εij]
Nj −1 ;
var[E[θj|Ag
−ij]] = var[θj] −E[(θj −E[θj|Ag
−ij])2],
≥var[θj] −var[θij] + var[εij]
Nj −1 .
Thus we obtain a lower bound on the revenue from consumer ij:
1
4 var[θj] −3
8
var[θij] + var[εij]
Nj −1 − 1
8Nj
var[θij] −1
4
√
1
Nj
var[θj]
√
var[θij].
Finally we can compute the diﬀerence in the revenues
R(A) −R(Ag) ≤Σj
N2
j
4N var[θj] + 1
4 var[θij] + Σj
3
8
Nj(var[θij] + var[εij])
Nj −1
−Σj
(
Nj
4 var[θj] −1
8 var[θij] −
√
Nj
4
√
var[θj]
√
var[θij]
)
.
As long as Nj <kN where k <1, we know that
R(A) −R(Ag)
<Σj
(
k−1
4 Nj var[θj] + 1
8 var[θij] +
√
Nj
4
√
var[θj]
√
var[θij]
)
+ 1
4 var[θij] + Σj
3
8
Nj(var[θij] + var[εij])
Nj −1 .
The dominant linear term is decreasing in Nj, and hence we know that as Nj →∞, revealing
48

=== PAGE 49 / 57 ===

group identities is more proﬁtable.
Proof of Proposition 10. Each consumer’s demand function is given by
qi = wi −(ℓi −xi)2 −pi.
This means the producer’s proﬁt is given by
π=
∑N
i=1
pi
(
wi −(ℓi −xi)2 −pi
)
.
Therefore, under any information structure S, the producer oﬀers
pi =
(
E[wi |S] −E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2 |S
])
/2,
=
(
E[wi |S] −E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2])
/2,
xi = E[ℓi |S] ,
where the second line relies on the fact that the underlying random variables are normal so
that ℓi −E[ℓi|S] is independent of S.
The consumer’s surplus is then given by
Ui(S) = 1
2E
[(
wi −(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2 −E[wi |S] −E[(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]
2
)2]
= 1
2E
[(
wi −1
2E[wi |S]
)2]
+ 1
2E
[(
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2 −1
2E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2])2]
−E
[(
wi −1
2E[wi |S]
)]
E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2 −1
2E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]]
= 1
2E
[
w2
i −3
4E[wi |S]2
]
+ 1
2E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])4 −3
4E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]2
]
−1
4E[wi] E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]
.
Therefore the diﬀerence is:
Ui(S) −Ui(∅) = −3
8 var [E[wi |S]] + 1
4µvar [E[ℓi |S]] + 1
2E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])4]
−3
8E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]2
−1
2E
[
(ℓi −µτ)4]
+ 3
8E
[
(ℓi −µτ)2]2
.
Because every random variable is assumed to be normal, ℓi−E[ℓi|S] is also normal with zero
49

=== PAGE 50 / 57 ===

mean. We can further simplify and obtain
Ui(S) −Ui(∅) = −3
8 var [E[wi |S]] + 1
4µvar [E[ℓi |S]] + 3
2 ([ℓi] −var [E[ℓi |S]])2
−3
8 (var [ℓi] −var [E[ℓi |S]])2 −3
2 var[ℓi]2 + 3
8 var[ℓi]2,
= −3
8 var [E[wi |S]] + 1
4µvar [E[ℓi |S]] + 9
8
(
var [E[ℓi |S]]2 −2 var [E[ℓi |S]] (σ2
τ + σ2
τi)
)
.
Similarly we have:
Πi(S) = 1
4E
[(
E[wi |S] −E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2])]
= 1
4E
[
E[wi |S]2 −2E[wi |S] E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]
+ E
[
(ℓi −E[ℓi |S])2]2]
,
and hence
Πi(S) −Πi(∅) = 1
4 var[E[wi |S]] + 1
2µvar [E[ℓi |S]]
+1
4
(
var [E[ℓi |S]]2 −2 var [E[ℓi |S]] (σ2
τ + σ2
τi)
)
.
To summarize, the impact of data sharing on social surplus is given by
Wi(S) −Wi(∅) = Ui(S) −Ui(∅) + Πi(S) −Πi(∅),
= −1
8 var [E[wi |S]] + 3
4µvar [E[ℓi |S]] + 11
8
(
var [E[ℓi |S]]2 −2 var [E[ℓi |S]] (σ2
τ + σ2
τi)
)
.
Therefore the diﬀerence Wi(S) −Wi(∅) is a quadratic function of the variance of the condi-
tional expectation x≜ var[E[ℓi|S]]. In particular, we let
g(x) ≜ 11
8 x2 +
(3
4µ−11
4 (σ2
τ + σ2
τi)
)
x.
As long as 3 µ >11(σ2
τ + σ2
τi), this function is positive and increasing in x, which means a
higher var[E[ℓi|S]] increases consumer surplus.
Finally, as in the proof of Proposition 3, aggregating wi increases Wi(S) but keeps Π(∅)
and Ui(S−i) unchanged. Not aggregating ℓi increases Wi(S) while keeping Π(∅) and Ui(S−i)
unchanged. Therefore it is optimal for the intermediary to aggregate wi but not ℓi.
50

=== PAGE 51 / 57 ===

Appendix B
In this Appendix, we explore the data intermediary’s ability to oﬀer privacy guarantees in
equilibrium by collecting less than perfect information about the consumers’ signals. Speciﬁ-
cally, we consider the additive data structure in (17)-(18) and again assume that fundamental
and error terms have a joint Gaussian distribution. We then specify a class of data policies
that add common and idiosyncratic noise terms ξ and ξi to the consumers’ original (noisy)
signals si. We then have the following data inﬂow,
xi = wi + σei  
=si
+ ξ+ ξi,
and the intermediary chooses the variance of the additional noise terms ( σ2
ξ and σ2
ξi).
Proposition 11 (Optimal Noise Structure)
1. The optimal data inﬂow policy adds no idiosyncratic noise; i.e., σ∗
ξi = 0.
2. The optimal data inﬂow policy adds (weakly) positive aggregate noise; i.e., σ∗
ξ ≥0.
Proof of Proposition 11. Recall the formula in the proof of Proposition 1,
Πi(Yi,Y ) = var[E[wi|Y]] + µ2
4 ,
Ui(Yi,Y ) = 1
2E[(E[wi|Yi])2 −3
4(E[wi|Y])2].
With a noisier report X, consumer i will know Si and X both on path and oﬀ path. The
producer will know X on path and X−i if consumer i deviates. Thus the revenue of the
intermediary is:
R(X)
N = Πi((Si,X),X) −Πi(Si,∅) + U((Si,X),X) −U((Si,X),X−i),
= var[E[wi|X]]
4 −3 var[E[wi|X]]
8 + 3 var[E[wi|X−i]]
8 ,
= −var[E[wi|X]]
8 + 3 var[E[wi|X−i]]
8 .
Recall that
Xi = wi + σei + ξ+ ξi = θ+ θi + (σεi + ξi) + (σε+ ξ).
For ease of exposition, we rewrite (σεi+ξi) as εi and (σε+ξ) as ε. Because the intermediary
can control the variance of ξ,ξi but not the initial precision of the consumers’ signals, we
51

=== PAGE 52 / 57 ===

eﬀectively have a lower bound of the variance σ2
i and σ2 on the new pair εi,ε. Denote the
variance of θ as σ2
θ and similarly for other variables. It is straightforward to calculate that:
E[wi|X] = Nσ2
θ + σ2
θi
N2(σ2
θ + σ2
ε) + N(σ2
εi + σ2
θi)
∑
i′
xi′,
E[wi|X−i] = Nσ2
θ
(N −1)2(σ2
θ + σ2
ε) + (N −1)(σ2
εi + σ2
θi)
∑
i′̸=i
xi′,
R(X) = 3(N −1)Nσ4
θ
8((N −1)(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi) − (Nσ2
θ + σ2
θi)2
8(N(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi)
Now we are ready to prove the theorem. We argue it is optimal to set σ2
εi = σ2
i (i.e., to
set σ2
ξi = 0 ). To show this result, suppose σ2
εi > σ2
i. Then there exists δ >0 such that
augmenting the common noise to ¯σ2
ε ≜ σ2
ε + δ2 and diminishing the idiosyncratic noise to
¯σ2
εi ≜ σ2
εi −(N −1)δ2 ≥σ2
i, the proﬁts of the intermediary will strictly increase. Too see
this, consider the expression of the revenue
R(S) = 3(N −1)Nσ4
θ
8((N −1)(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi) − (Nσ2
θ + σ2
θi)2
8(N(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi).
The ﬁrst term is unchanged under the new information structure, whereas the denominator
of the second term increases; thus, the total proﬁt increases.
As we establish in Proposition 12, no proﬁtable intermediation is feasible for values of α
less than a threshold that decreases with N. This threshold is independent of the correlation
coeﬃcient β of the initial noise terms ( ei,ej). Furthermore, as α approaches this threshold
from above, the optimal level of common noise grows without bound. Figure 7 shows the
optimal variance in the additional common noise term.
Proposition 12 (Proﬁtability of Data Intermediation)
Under the optimal data policy, the intermediary’s proﬁts are strictly positive if and only if
α> N(
√
3 + 1)−1
2N(N + 1) −1 ∈(0,1) .
Proof of Proposition 12. Recall that α is the correlation coeﬃcient between wi and
wj. Because we have normalized var [wi] = 1, under the additive structure, we have σ2
θ = α
and σ2
θi = 1 −α. To establish the result in the statement, we must then show that the
intermediary obtains positive proﬁts if and only if
N
(√
3 −1
)
σ2
θ −σ2
θi >0.
52

=== PAGE 53 / 57 ===

Figure 4: Optimal Additional Noise ( σ= 1,N = 2)
When N
(√
3 −1
)
σ2
θ <σ2
θi, we have:
R= 3Nσ4
θ
8(σ2
θ + σ2
ε)
(
1 − σ2
θi + σ2
εi
(N −1)(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi
)
−(Nσ2
θ + σ2
θi)2
8N(σ2
θ + σ2
ε)
(
1 − σ2
θi + σ2
εi
N(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi
)
≤
( 3Nσ4
θ
8(σ2
θ + σ2
ε) −(Nσ2
θ + σ2
θi)2
8N(σ2
θ + σ2
ε)
)(
1 − σ2
θi + σ2
εi
N(σ2
ε + σ2
θ) + σ2
εi + σ2
θi
)
≤0.
Conversely, when N
(√
3 −1
)
σ2
θ >σ2
θi, we can rewrite R as
Aσ2
ε + B
8(Nσ2
ε + σ2
εi + Nσ2
θ + σ2
θi)(Nσ2
ε −σ2
ε + σ2
εi + Nσ2
θ −σ2
θ + σ2
θi),
A= (N −1)
(
2N2σ4
θ −2Nσ2
θσ2
θi −σ4
θi
)
>0.
Therefore the intermediary can obtain a positive proﬁt R by setting σ2
ε suﬃciently large
through the addition of correlated noise.
The optimal level of common noise σ∗
ξ is strictly positive when the number of consumers
N or the correlation in their willingness to pay α is suﬃciently small: if the consumers’
preferences are suﬃciently correlated, or if the market is suﬃciently large, the intermediary
does not add any noise. If the consumers’ fundamentals are not suﬃciently correlated, the
53

=== PAGE 54 / 57 ===

intermediary makes their signals more correlated with additional common noise σ∗
ξ.
The additional noise reduces the amount of information procured from consumers and
hence the total compensation owed to them. These cost savings come at the expense of lower
revenues. In this respect, aggregation and noise serve a common purpose. However, because
the intermediary optimally anonymizes the consumers’ signals, the correlation in the supple-
mental noise terms ξ renders signal si less valuable on the margin for estimating the average
willingness to pay ¯w. In other words, the aggregate demand information without consumer
i’s signal si is a relatively better predictor of ¯w when the intermediary uses common rather
than idiosyncratic noise. Therefore, by using common noise exclusively, the intermediary
can hold the information sold to the producer constant while reducing the cost of acquiring
that information from consumers.
Finally, note that these two elements of information design—aggregation and noise—
interact richly with one another. In particular, the value of common noise is deeply linked to
that of aggregate data: if the intermediary is restricted to complete (identity-revealing) data
sharing, one can show that supplemental idiosyncratic noise is optimal when the consumers’
initial signals si are suﬃciently precise.
54

=== PAGE 55 / 57 ===

References
Acquisti, A., C. Taylor,and L. Wagman(2016): “The Economics of Privacy,” Journal
of Economic Literature, 54, 442–492.
Ali, S. N., G. Lewis, and S. Vasserman(2019): “Voluntary Disclosure and Personalized
Pricing,” Discussion Paper 26592, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Aridor, G., Y.-K. Che, and T. Salz (2020): “The Economic Consequences of Data
Privacy Regulation: Empirical Evidence from GDPR,” Discussion Paper 26900, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Arrieta-Ibarra, I., L. Goff, D. Jimenez-Hernandez, J. Lanier, and G. Weyl
(2018): “Should We Treat Data as Labor? Moving beyond ”Free”,” American Economic
Review Paper and Proceedings, 108, 38–42.
Athey, S., C. Catalini, and C. Tucker (2017): “The Digital Privacy Paradox: Small
Money, Small Costs, Small Talk,” Discussion Paper 23488, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bergemann, D., and A. Bonatti (2011): “Targeting in Advertising Markets: Implica-
tions for Oﬄine Vs. Online Media,” Rand Journal of Economics , 42(3), 417–443.
Bergemann, D., and A. Bonatti (2019): “Markets for Information: An Introduction,”
Annual Review of Economics , 11, 85–107.
Bergemann, D., B. Brooks, and S. Morris (2015): “The Limits of Price Discrimina-
tion,” American Economic Review, 105, 921–957.
Choi, J., D. Jeon, and B. Kim (2019): “Privacy and Personal Data Collection with
Information Externalities,” Journal of Public Economics , 173, 113–124.
Committee on the Judiciary(2020): “Investigation of Competition in Digital Markets,”
Discussion paper, United States House of Representatives.
Crem`er, J., Y.-A. de Montjoye, and H. Schweitzer (2019): “Competition policy
for the digital era,” Discussion paper, European Commission.
Cummings, R., K. Ligett, M. Pai, and A. Roth (2016): “The Strange Case of Privacy
in Equilibrium Models,” in ACM-EC (Economics and Computation) 2016 .
55

=== PAGE 56 / 57 ===

Fainmesser, I., A. Galeotti, and R. Momot (2020): “Digital Privacy,” Discussion
paper, Johns Hopkins University.
Furman, J., D. Coyle, A. Fletcher, D. McAules, and P. Marsden (2019): “Un-
locking Digital Competition: Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel,” HM Trea-
sury, United Kingdom .
Gradwohl, R. (2017): “Information Sharing and Privacy in Networks,” in ACM-EC (Eco-
nomics and Computation) 2017 .
Ichihashi, S. (2020a): “The Economics of Data Externalities,” Discussion paper, Bank of
Canada.
Ichihashi, S. (2020b): “Online Privacy and Information Disclosure by Consumers,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 110(2), 569–595.
Johnson, G., S. Shriver, and S. Goldberg (2020): “Privacy & market concentration:
Intended & unintended consequences of the GDPR,” Discussion paper, Boston University
Questrom School of Business.
Jullien, B., Y. Lefouili, and M. Riordan (2020): “Privacy Protection, Security, and
Consumer Retention,” Discussion paper, Toulouse School of Economics.
Liang, A., and E. Madsen (2020): “Data and Incentives,” Discussion paper, Northwestern
University.
Lin, T. (2019): “Valuing Intrinsic and Instrumental Preferences for Privacy,” .
Lizzeri, A. (1999): “Information Revelation and Certiﬁcation Intermediaries,” RAND
Journal of Economics , 30, 214–231.
Loertscher, S., and L. M. Marx (2020): “Digital monopolies: Privacy protection or
price regulation?,” International Journal of Industrial Organization , 71, 1–13.
Miklos-Thal, J., and G. Shaffer (2016): “Naked Exclusion with Private Oﬀers,”Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8, 174–194.
Olea, J. L. M., P. Ortoleva, M. Pai, and A. Prat (2019): “Competing Models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.03809 .
Posner, E. A., and E. G. Weyl (2018): Radical markets: Uprooting capitalism and
democracy for a just society . Princeton University Press.
56

=== PAGE 57 / 57 ===

Robinson, J. (1933): The Economics of Imperfect Competition . Macmillan, London.
Romer, P. (2019): “A Tax That Could Fix Big Tech,” The New York Times .
Schmalensee, R. (1981): “Output and Welfare Implications of Monopolistic Third-Degree
Price Discrimination,” American Economic Review, 71, 242–247.
Segal, I. (1999): “Contracting with Externalities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 114,
337–388.
Segal, I., and M. Whinston (2000): “Naked Exclusion: Comment,” American Economic
Review, 90, 296–309.
Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms (2019): “Final Report,” Discussion paper,
Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State.
Tang, H. (2019): “The Value of Privacy: Evidence from Online Borrowers,” Discussion
paper, HEC Paris.
Taylor, C.(2004): “Consumer Privacy and the Market for Customer Information,” RAND
Journal of Economics , 35, 631–651.
Zuboff, S. (2019): The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
the New Frontier of Power . Public Aﬀairs, New York.
57